TAPIR Executive Summary
Renato De Giovanni
August 28, 2007
%! target        : html
%! style         : w3c_main.css
%! Encoding      : iso-8859-1
%! PostProc(tex) : '\\section' '\\newpage\n\\section'
%! PostProc(tex) : '\[\[' '\\footnote{\\tiny{'
%! PostProc(tex) : '\]\]' '}}'
%! PostProc(tex) : '#' '\#'
%! PostProc(tex) : '--blankline--' '\\addvspace{5mm}'
%! PostProc(tex) : '--newpage--' '\\newpage'
%! PostProc(tex) : '--breakline--' '\\newline'
%! PostProc(html): '(?i)(<pre>)' '<div class="exampleInner">\1'
%! PostProc(html): '(?i)(</pre>)' '\1</div>'
%! PostProc(html): '<FONT SIZE="4">' '<H4>'
%! PostProc(html): '</FONT>' '</H4>'

------------------------------

= Definition =

TAPIR is a computer protocol designed for discovery, search and
retrieval of distributed data over the Internet. TAPIR consists of a
specification that determines how client applications seeking
information should communicate with server applications hosting data.

= Motivation =

[DiGIR http://www.digir.net/] and 
[BioCASe http://www.biocase.org/products/protocols/] are alternative 
protocols developed to access historical data from geographically 
distributed biological collections. While DiGIR and BioCASe have been
successful in their own domains, incompatibilities between them make
the exchange of biodiversity data more complex than it should be. 
TAPIR, the [TDWG http://www.tdwg.org] Access Protocol for Information
Retrieval, is an international project to solve this problem and to 
add new functionality.

= How TAPIR works =

A TAPIR network comprises distributed data providers with different
database systems and different data structures, but all of them having
the same kind of content. Consider a group of natural history museums
that want to make their biological specimen data available from a
single Web search page. Each organization has its own database in a
different computer environment. For example, some may use a commercial
collection management software, others may use an open source software
environment, or even just a simple spreadsheet. Their common
requirement is for all searches via a single Web page to access all
databases and produce a combined and integrated response to the
searcher.

Since all databases contain the same kind of content, it is therefore
possible to define what is called a data abstraction layer.
[DarwinCore http://www.tdwg.org/activities/darwincore/] is an example
of a data abstraction layer for biodiversity data. DarwinCore
specifies the details of a specimen or observation of a specimen, such
as the name of the organism, where, when and by whom it was
collected. TAPIR works with one or more of these data abstraction
layers to make it appear to the searcher that all the separate
databases are like one big integrated database.

The data providers usually don't need to change their databases nor to
periodically export their data. Instead, they will typically install a
'wrapper' software application and then configure it in a way that
each concept from the data abstraction layer corresponds to a
particular field in their own databases.

This wrapper receives the remote TAPIR search request, translates it
into the local language and data structure, applies it to the
database, and then sends back a TAPIR search response to the
searcher.

TAPIR is flexible enough to be used in a wide range of
applications. Other examples include harvesting data to build a
central database, sharing data using different Web formats (e.g. 
[RSS http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSS], [RDF http://www.w3.org/RDF/] or
[KML http://code.google.com/apis/kml/documentation/]) or building Web
interfaces to help browse or search any database.

= TAPIR's key features =

TAPIR

- Integrates well with the Web infrastructure because it is based on 
established international Web standards like 
[HTTP http://www.w3.org/Protocols/], [XML http://www.w3.org/XML] and 
[XML Schema http://www.w3.org/XML/Schema].
- Is independent of the data being exchanged and therefore can be used
to access a wide range of data.
- Can return data in many different formats - search responses are flexible and customizable.
- Includes five operations to cover all necessary aspects for
searching and retrieving data in a network: access to metadata
(descriptive data) and capabilities of the provider, preliminary data
discovery and data mining, searching, and monitoring the data provider
service.
- Allows all operations to be invoked through simple Web addresses.
- Supports complex requests.
 

The existing TAPIR wrapper applications include 
[PyWrapper http://www.pywrapper.org],  
[TapirLink http://wiki.tdwg.org/twiki/bin/view/TAPIR/TapirLink] and
[TapirDotNET http://sourceforge.net/projects/tapirdotnet/].

= More information =

TAPIR is an approved [TDWG http://www.tdwg.org] standard. The TAPIR 
homepage (http://www.tdwg.org/activities/tapir/) contains links to 
resources including mailing list, Wiki, specification and other 
documentation.
