
%! target        : xhtml
%! Options       : --toc --toc-level 3 --enum-title
%! Encoding      : UTF-8
%! preproc       : URL_TAPIR_NS   http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/1.0
%! preproc       : URL_TAPIR_XSD  http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/1.0/schema/tdwg_tapir.xsd
%! PostProc(html): '(?i)(<pre>)' '<div class="exampleInner">\1'
%! PostProc(html): '(?i)(</pre>)' '\1</div>'
%! PostProc(xhtml): '(?i)(<pre>)' '<div class="exampleInner">\1'
%! PostProc(xhtml): '(?i)(</pre>)' '\1</div>'
%! PostProc(html): '--indent--' '<div>'
%! PostProc(xhtml): '--indent--' '<div>'
%! PostProc(html): '--unindent--' '</div>'
%! PostProc(xhtml): '--unindent--' '</div>'

= Introduction =

This document specifies the TDWG Access Protocol for Information
Retrieval (TAPIR). TAPIR is a Web Service protocol to perform queries
across distributed databases of varied physical and logical
structure. It was originally designed to be used by federated
networks.

TAPIR is intended for communication between applications, using HTTP
as the transport mechanism. Its functionality is available through
five types of request-response operations addressing the following
needs: retrieve service metadata, retrieve service settings, inspect
available content, perform queries, and monitor service
availability. TAPIR does not include operations for adding, updating
or deleting data on provider databases. Requests can be encoded in XML
or simple URL parameters. Responses are always structured in
XML. TAPIR uses the XML Schema Definition language to describe
and validate the structure of XML request and response messages sent
between a client (the requesting software) and a server (the provider
of the data or service).

The underlying implementation and data model of provider databases
remain opaque to TAPIR clients because all queries reference elements
(concepts) from data abstraction layers (conceptual schemas). TAPIR
providers advertise through the capabilities operation which elements
from one or more data abstraction layers are supported by the
service. Clients can thefore formulate queries referencing these
elements.

Since TAPIR is not bound to any particular data abstraction layer, it
is necessary to define (or reuse) at least one data abstraction layer
to set up a TAPIR service. Networks or individual providers are free
to define their own data abstraction layers.

TAPIR was also designed to be independent of any particular structure
for search responses (known as output models). It is necessary to
define at least one output model, or to reference an existing one, to
use the search operation. Networks or individual providers are free to
define their own output models.

TAPIR's flexibility makes it suitable to both very simple service
implementations where the provider only responds to a set of
pre-defined queries, or more advanced implementations where the
provider software can dynamically parse complex queries referencing
output models supplied by the client.

Although TAPIR XML requests and responses can be validated using an
XML Schema, the full TAPIR protocol contains additional rules that
need to be followed and are specified on this document.

= Symbols, terminology conventions, and examples =

The following conventions are used throughout this document to aid clarity:

| <...> | Enclosing angle brackets indicate that the enclosed term refers to an XML element name. |
| @... | @ sign before a term indicates that the term is an attribute name (but @ is not part of the name). |

The following symbols are used to define elements and terms:

| ::= | Used to indicate the content equivalent of an element or term. |
| ? | When used after an element or term in a term definition, it indicates that the element or term is optional. When used in a URL it indicates a parameter list for a GET statement. |
| + | Indicates that an element or term must be represented one or more times. |
| * | Indicates that and element or term can occur zero or more times. |
| | | A vertical bar between terms or elements indicates alternatives, as in a choice from a list. |

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are applied in the normative sense according to [RFC 2119 http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt].

This specification makes use of numerous examples. They all refer to
fictitious service addresses and data, unless otherwise declared. Most
examples focus on specific parts of TAPIR messages, omitting other
parts for the sake of clarity. This means that most XML examples will
not be entirely valid according to the TAPIR XML Schema since they are
incomplete.

= General Aspects of the Protocol =

== Available Operations ==

The TAPIR protocol defines five operations:

- **Metadata:** Default operation to retrieve basic information about the service.

- **Capabilities:** Used to retrieve the essential settings to properly interact with the service.

- **Inventory:** Used to retrieve distinct values of one or more concepts.

- **Search:** Main operation to search and retrieve data.

- **Ping:** Used for monitoring purposes to check service availability.


Each operation consists of a request and the corresponding
response. Being a stateless protocol, operation calls are always
completely independent from each other.

== Message Transport ==

TAPIR messages (requests or responses) are intended to be transmitted
by means of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) version 1.0 or
greater. TAPIR providers must accept both GET and POST methods for
requests.

== Access Points ==

TAPIR access points (or end points) are represented by an HTTP Uniform
Resource Locator (URL) which is used to interact with the
service. Access points therefore include the transport protocol (HTTP
or HTTPS), the host name, an optional port number, an optional path
with or without a script name, and an optional query string. The URL
used to interact with a TAPIR service must be valid according to the
HTTP Common Gateway Interface (CGI) standard, and the query part of
the URL must be encoded to protect special characters according to
UTF-8 RFC 3986.

To ensure the widest access possible to the service, TAPIR providers
are recommended to use default port numbers (80 for HTTP, 443 for
HTTPS) since clients may sometimes be located in places with
restrictive firewall policies.

== Message Encoding ==

=== Requests ===

TAPIR requests can be encoded in two ways:

==== Key-Value Pairs (KVP) Parameters ====

Requests are possible through HTTP GET or POST with the specific KVP
parameters for each operation. Support for KVP request encoding is
mandatory for all TAPIR service implementations.

An example of a KVP TAPIR capabilities request is:

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=capabilities""

==== XML ====

TAPIR requests can be encoded entirely as an XML document. The support
of XML request encoding is optional for TAPIR service
implementations. XML requests have the following general format:

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS">
  <header>
    <!-- header specific elements -->
  </header>
  <operation_name>
    <!-- operation specific parameters -->
  </operation_name>
</request>
```

A capabilities request, which does not require specific parameters,
takes the following form:

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS">
  <header>
    <!-- header specific elements -->
  </header>
  <capabilities/>
</request>
```

XML requests can be sent to a service in two ways:

- **HTTP POST body:** the entire XML message goes directly into the
body of the HTTP POST request. In this case the HTTP Content-Type
header is required to be "text/xml". If the request uses a
parameterised filter, parameter values can only be encoded in the
URL's query string, since the HTTP body is already used by the XML
message.

```
POST /tapir.cgi HTTP/1.1
Host: example.net
Content-Type: text/xml
Content-Length: 194
<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<request>
  <header>
    <source sendtime="2006-10-15T14:22:42.29"/>
  </header>
  <ping/>
</request>
```
//Example of a TAPIR XML request using the HTTP POST body.//

- **HTTP POST/GET 'request' parameter:** The URL-encoded XML message
is submitted via the parameter named "request". The HTTP Content-Type
header should be "application/x-www-form-urlencoded". Alternatively,
the parameter value can also be a URL pointing to a TAPIR XML request
document.

```
POST /tapir.cgi HTTP/1.1
Host: example.net
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
Content-Length: 281
request=%3C%3Fxml+version%3D%271.0%27+encoding%3D%27UTF-8%27%3F%3E%0D%0A%3C
request%3E%0D%0A%09%3Cheader%3E%0D%0A%09%09%3Csource+
sendtime%3D%222006-10-15T14%3A22%3A42.29%22%2F
%3E%0D%0A%09%3C%2Fheader%3E%0D%0A%09%3C
ping%2F%3E%0D%0A%3C%2Frequest%3E%0D%0A
```
//Example of a TAPIR URL-encoded XML request using HTTP POST.//


Since all encodings can potentially be present in the same HTTP
request, the following precedence should take place:

+ If the provider supports XML encoding, when the "request" parameter
is present (either though GET or POST), TAPIR parameters must be taken
from the corresponding XML.
+ When the "request" parameter is not present and the HTTP request
includes other parameters (either through GET or POST), TAPIR
parameters must be read as KVP.
+ If the provider supports XML encoding, when the HTTP method is POST
without parameters, TAPIR parameters must be taken from the XML as raw
POST data.


=== Responses ===

TAPIR responses should always be encoded in valid XML and by default
have the HTTP Content-Type set to "text/xml". The charset must be
consistent considering the HTTP header, the XML declararion and the
output stream. It is not recommended to omit the charset in the HTTP
header because [RFC 3023 http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3023.txt]
indicates that in this case parsers should assume "us-ascii", which
may be inconsistent with the XML declararion and the output
stream. The recommended charset to be used with "text/xml" is UTF-8.

The XML content of TAPIR reponses normally includes: a header section,
the specific result from the requested operation and an optional
diagnostics section. All structure that encloses the specific
operation result is known as TAPIR envelope. The envelope consists
of the response element, the header content, the operation element,
the summary content (for inventory or search operations) and the
diagnostics content.

Metadata, capabilities, inventory and ping responses should always
include the TAPIR envelope. Only in search responses this may not
occur if the "envelope" parameter is set to "false". The "envelope"
parameter is only availabe in the search operation. When the
"envelope" parameter is set to "false", the content returned will be
completely determined by the output model definition, and the service
is free to perform HTTP content negotiation. This may result in a
different HTTP Content-type being returned (for instance
"application/rdf+xml" for RDF encoded in XML). When the "envelope"
parameter is set to "false" and the search returns no results, the
service must return an HTTP 204 code (No Content).

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<response xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS">
  <header>
    <!-- header specific elements -->
  </header>
  <operation_name>
    <!-- operation specific results -->
  </operation_name>
  <diagnostics>
    <!-- diagnostics information -->
  </diagnostics>
</response>
```
//Example of the general message format of a TAPIR response. Everything except what goes in the placeholder indicated by "operation specific results" is known as the TAPIR envelope//

== Namespaces ==

The namespace for this version of TAPIR is **""URL_TAPIR_NS""**

The TAPIR namespace must be the default namespace in all TAPIR
messages.

TAPIR metadata responses include elements from the following
namespaces:

|| Prefix | Namespace | Source |
| xml | ""http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace"" | XML |
| xsd | ""http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"" | XML Schema |
| dc | ""http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/"" | Dublin Core |
| dct | ""http://purl.org/dc/terms/"" | Dublin Core Terms |
| geo | ""http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#"" | Basic geo vocabulary |
| vcard | ""http://www.w3.org/2001/vcard-rdf/3.0#"" | VCARD |

TAPIR metadata responses may change the prefixes for all namespaces
above, except the "xml" prefix which is reserved according to
[Namespaces in XML 1.1 http://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names11/].

TAPIR search responses may include other namespaces according to the
response structure being used.

== Data Abstraction ==

=== Conceptual Schemas ===

In TAPIR, conceptual schemas can be understood as a formal definition
of concepts that are used for querying and reporting the content of
databases. They provide the necessary data abstraction layer to be
used on top of specific implementations from each participant of a
TAPIR federated network. Conceptual schemas usually focus on specific
areas of knowledge, providing data models with various levels of
detail.

Although the main TAPIR operations always need to reference concepts,
the protocol was created to be independent of any particular
conceptual schema. TAPIR networks and data providers are free to
create or choose from existing conceptual schemas. However, it is
important to note that the interoperability level across different
TAPIR providers will depend on the conceptual schemas that they
use. TAPIR providers can only understand queries that reference known
concepts, i.e., concepts that were locally mapped and that are
advertised in its capabilities. Therefore, TAPIR clients cannot send
the same search request to two TAPIR providers that have mapped
different conceptual schemas (unless the request references by alias
equivalent query templates or output models that have been assigned
the same alias by both providers).

TAPIR messages can reference concepts from multiple conceptual
schemas, which means that conceptual schemas can be modularised and
extended if necessary.

TAPIR does not enforce any particular format or encoding for
conceptual schemas. Examples of languages that can be used to define
conceptual schemas include XML Schema, RDF Schema, XMI and
others. From TAPIR's perspective, conceptual schemas should minimally
list the concepts, indicating their meaning and datatypes. Since
provider software may typically need to parse existing conceptual
schemas during configuration, a common format is suggested in appendix
2 to describe conceptual schemas used by TAPIR networks.

=== Concepts ===

Concepts are general definitions of classes of objects or their
characteristics. They are defined externally to TAPIR. Although
concepts can potentially represent classes, relationships or
attributes, this version of TAPIR limits its use to attributes (e.g.,
species name, observation date, locality name, registration number,
etc.) whose context is defined by the conceptual schema or output
model being used.

In TAPIR, concepts are referenced by identifiers, which are always
treated as simple strings. These references take place in different
parts of the protocol, such as filter expressions, output model
mappings, capabilities responses and inventory operations. The TAPIR
XML Schema defines a "qualifiedConceptReferenceType" that is used by
most elements representing concepts, and which consists of a complex
type with an attribute called "id". TAPIR makes no assumptions about
how concept identifiers are defined and it does not enforce any
particular pattern. However, fully qualified concept identifiers are
recommended to be:

- Globally unique;
- Permanently resolvable by means of standard Internet protocols;
- Free from characters that are not allowed in the query term of URLs.


By being globally unique they can be distinguished from any other
possible concepts. By being permanently resolvable, a formal
definition of the concept can be retrieved whenever necessary. By
being free from reserved characters for the query term of URLs, they
can be used directly as HTTP GET parameters in TAPIR KVP request
encoding.

When concepts come from a data abstraction layer defined in XML Schema, the
recommendation for concept identifiers is to concatenate the namespace
of the schema with the local xpath to the instance element that
corresponds to the concept. Taking the following XML Schema as an example
of a conceptual schema:

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<xs:schema xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
           targetNamespace="http://example.net/cs/1.0/"
           elementFormDefault="qualified">
  <xs:element name="Person">
    <xs:complexType>
      <xs:sequence>
        <xs:element name="Name" type="xs:string"/>
        <xs:element name="Email" type="xs:string"/>
        <xs:element name="Birth" type="xs:date" minOccurs="0"/>
      </xs:sequence>
      <xs:attribute name="Id" type="xs:string" use="required"/>
    </xs:complexType>
  </xs:element>
</xs:schema>
```

The element represented by the xpath "/Person/Name" would be
identified as:

""http://example.net/cs/1.0/Person/Name""

And the "Id" attribute would be identified as:

""http://example.net/cs/1.0/Person/@Id""

Providers can also associate an alias to each concept, declaring
aliases in capabilities responses. In this case, concepts may also be
referenced directly by the alias (when no alias is associated with the
corresponding conceptual schema) or by the following notation when
both the concept and its conceptual schema are associated with an
alias:

Concept_Alias '@' Conceptual_Schema_Alias

Assuming that the concept in the previous example is associated with
the alias "PersonName" and its conceptual schema is associated with
the alias "cs1.0", this would enable the concept to be also identified
using the following short notation:

PersonName@cs1.0

== Output Models ==

Output models are central to the search operation. They define or
reference a generic XML response structure based on XML Schema and
specify a mapping between nodes in the schema and concepts from one or
more conceptual schemas. To a certain extent, the mapping section
gives meaning to XML nodes in the structure, and clearly shows that
the same concepts can be represented and structured in different ways
in XML. Different output models can therefore be created for the same
set of concepts.

Output models may indicate which global element defined in the
response structure should be the root element in search
responses. When not specified, the first global element must be used.

Output models must specify an indexing element by pointing to a node
in the structure. The indexing element will be used as a reference for
counting records and paging results.

Output models can be defined and used in various ways. They can be
created or recognised by the provider and then advertised as
<knownOutputModels> in the capabilities response. If the provider
supports <anyOutputModels> then the client may create their own models
either as external documents or as in-line definitions in an XML
search request. All required concepts in each output model advertised
by the provider must refer to concepts mapped by the provider and
advertised as <mappedConcepts> in the capabilities response.

The different ways of using output models in TAPIR allow for providers
with different levels of service capability. Some providers may have a
fixed (hard-coded) way of producing XML results that corresponds to
each of their known output models, which means they do not need to
have the ability to dynamically parse output model definitions. On the
other hand, providers that have the ability to parse output model
definitions (<anyOutputModels> capability) may choose to parse known
models in the same way as they do for arbitrary models provided by
clients.

== Query Templates ==

Query templates extend the idea of output models. If output models
define what type of content should be returned and how it should be
structured, query templates can add pre-defined, parameterised filters
and other constraints depending on the operation.

Query templates can be used by search and inventory operations. An
inventory template specifies one or more concepts and an optional
filter. A search template specifies an output model, an optional
filter, and an optional order by parameter (pointing to concepts in the
output model).

In search operations, the same output model can be referenced and used
by many different search templates, which could be related to
different parts of the output model, or include different filter
criteria for different contexts, etc.

The same flexibility for creating and using output models is available
for query templates. Data providers can create their own specific
templates, or choose from existing templates and then declare them in
capabilities responses. Providers can also have the ability to
dynamically parse arbitrary templates defined by clients.

= TAPIR XML Documents =

TAPIR XML documents can be messages exchanged in operations or
external resources such as output models and query templates, which
can be referenced by search or inventory requests. All TAPIR documents
must be valid XML documents and have a root element that validates
against the TAPIR XML Schema. The root element of a TAPIR document
declares its purpose and includes the namespaces referenced inside the
document. It is recommended that the root element includes the "xsi"
namespace and the TAPIR schema location to facilitate validation of
messages. The possible root elements for each type of TAPIR document
are:

```
Root element ::= ( <request> | <response> | <outputModel> | <inventoryTemplate> | <searchTemplate> )
```

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?> 
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS" 
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" 
         xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS 
                             URL_TAPIR_XSD">
   <!--   header and operation specific content -->
</request>
```
//Example: Root element with namespace declarations in a TAPIR request document//

== Request and Response Documents ==

TAPIR XML request documents consist of a header followed by an element
indicating the operation, which in turn may contain additional
parameters.

```
Request type ::= <header> 
                 ( <metadata> | <capabilities> | <inventory> | <search> | <ping> )
```

TAPIR XML response documents usually consist of a header followed by
an element indicating the operation and including the result. The
operation element can be followed by an optional diagnostics element.

```
Response type ::= <header>
                  ( <metadata> | <capabilities> | <inventory> | <search> | <pong> | <error> | <logged> ) 
                  <diagnostics>?
```

This general structure of a TAPIR <response> element including a
<header>, an operation related element and an optional <diagnostics>
is the TAPIR envelope. The TAPIR envelope can be turned off in search
operations by setting the "envelope" parameter to "false". In this
case the root element of a response will be determined by the output
model response structure definition, and the TAPIR namespace should
not be included at all.

=== Header ===

The purpose of headers is to give information about the source and
destination of the operation, as well as timestamp and software
related to the source. Headers must be present in all XML requests and
all XML responses, except in search responses when the parameter
"envelope" is set to "false" in the corresponding request. A TAPIR
header has three parts:

```
Header type ::= <source>+ <destination>? <custom>?
```

The <source> element gives information about where the message
originated and is repeatable to enable tracing back through any
intermediary steps when the message has passed through more than one
server in a cascading operation. Each intermediary service must add
its address as a new <source> item at the end of the list.

The <destination> element is used to indicate the final target for a
TAPIR message. It can be used when there are intermediary layers
between the client and the server. This element is intended to help
communication between clients and message brokers. The destination
element takes a simple string, which will usually be a URI but can be
anything, including codes or identifiers specific to networks. The
<destination> element is optional and a TAPIR provider is free to
ignore it.

A <custom> element serves as an extension slot for any additional
information not defined in the schema. It can be used to put whatever
extra information an implementer wishes to add.

Source elements correspond to each software agent that created or
processed the message until it reached the current service that
received the message. It has three parts:

```
Source type ::= @accesspoint @sendtime <software>?
```

In requests, the "accesspoint" attribute of each <source> element must
contain the IP address of the corresponding software agent, except the
last <source> element. The IP address of the last source should always
be taken from the REMOTE_ADDR environment variable. In responses, the
"accesspoint" attribute must contain the service URL.

The "sendtime" attribute must be used to record the time that the
message was sent or processed in the associated software agent. Its
content must be recorded in ISO 8601 datetime format.

The <software> element can be used to identify the software used to
process the TAPIR message. It is defined as follows:

```
Software type ::= @name @version <dependencies>*
```

The attributes "name" and "version" are simple strings and should be
used to indicate the name and version number of the software.

The <dependencies> element can be used to list any other software,
libraries, framework or operating system related to the declared
software. The dependencies element includes repeatable instances of
<dependency> which references back the software type.

```
<request xmlns=URL_TAPIR_NS
               xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"  
               xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                                   URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
      <software name="TapirClient" version="3.0"/>
    </source>
  </header>
  <capabilities/>
</request>
```
//Example of a TAPIR request message encoded in XML. Here the client is asking for service capabilities.//

=== Operation-specific Elements ===

Operation elements can contain specific parameters (in requests) or
specific results (in responses) related to the operation. They will be
described in more details in the next sections.

=== Fatal Errors ===

Errors are normally listed in the diagnostics section of a TAPIR
message. When there are extreme errors that cause the system not to be
able to formulate a proper response, for instance if a database
connection error occurs or the user requests a service that the
provider does not supply, then the <error> element may be used inside
the <response> body.

```
<response>
  <!-- omitting header -->
  <error code="DBS_CONNECTION_ERROR" 
         level="fatal" 
         time="2005-11-11T12:23:57.023+01:00">Could not connect to database</error>
</response>
```
//Example of a fatal error message given in replacement for the normal operation element in a response// 

=== Log-only Operations ===

When requests have the "log-only" attribute set to true, TAPIR
providers produce a <logged> element in responses instead of the
expected operation element. Log-only operations can be used to report
back to the original data providers when users access their data from
data aggregators.

=== Diagnostics ===

The <diagnostics> element can be used by responses for declaring
errors and statistics. It consists of an optional list of multiple
<diagnostic> elements.

```
diagnostic type ::= @code? @level @time? message
```

The "code" attribute is an optional system code for the error or
message. There are no standard codes defined in this
specification. TAPIR providers are free to define and use their own
codes.

The "level" attribute is mandatory and can assume the following values
to indicate the severity of the diagnostic:

```
@level ::= ( "debug"|"info"|"warn"|"error"|"fatal" )
```

An optional ISO 8601 datetime value can be included in the "time"
attribute.

Diagnostic messages are text strings defined by implementations.

```
<response>
  <!-- omitting header -->
  <!-- omitting operation -->
  <diagnostics>
    <diagnostic level="error" code="REQ_READ_MODEL_FAILED">The requested model could not be read.</diagnostic>
    <diagnostic level="warning" code="REQ_STRUCTURE_UNKNOWN_SCHEMA_TAG">
      Unknown xml schema element "test" encountered in line 3. Ignored.
    </diagnostic>
    <diagnostic level="info" code="RSP_ELEM_DROP">
      XML element "myel" dropped because it misses required attribute "myattr"
    </diagnostic>
    <diagnostic level="debug">Start reading the datasource configurations</diagnostic>
  </diagnostics>
</response>
```
//Example of a diagnostics section in a response document//

== Output Models ==

TAPIR search requests and search templates can refer to an output
model document which is accessed as an external resource by its
URL. An output model document must be an XML document that validates
against the "outputModelType" defined in the TAPIR XML Schema. Output
model documents have no header or diagnostic sections and use
<outputModel> as the root element including the namespace
declarations.

Output model documents can include optional (but recommended)
documentation elements for a name (<label>) and description
(<documentation>) that are of value in managing multiple output models
and informing users of their function.

Output models can be defined with the following elements:

: <structure>
Defines the search response structure using a subset of the XML Schema
language. Required.

: <rootElement>
Indicates the name of a global element in the structure that should be
the root element in search responses. The name is specified in the
@name attribute. When not present, the first global element must be 
the root element. Optional.

: <indexingElement>
Points to a node in the structure, usually unbounded, that should be
used for counting the records returned and paging results. The
indexing element is referenced by the @path attribute using a simple
XPath that points to a response structure node. Required.

: <mapping>
Maps nodes from the structure definition (given under <structure>) to
concepts, literals or environment variables known to the provider
software. Required.


=== Response Structures ===

Response structures define through XML Schema how search responses
should be structured in XML. A response structure must start with the
root element <schema> and all its elements must be in the namespace
**""http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema""**. TAPIR response structures
must always specify a "targetNamespace" and there should be at least
one global element definition. The global element that should be used
to instantiate the root element in the resulting XML is specified in
the output model. When not specified, the first global element should
be used for this purpose.

TAPIR providers must declare as part of their capabilities to what
extent they understand the XML Schema language. This may vary from
full support to a large set of XML Schema constructs to no knowledge
at all (in cases when only a limited number of pre-defined output
models or query templates needs to be understood, or in cases when
searches are not supported). Only providers that declare they support
"any" output models must be able to dynamically parse response
structures to understand how search results should be generated. In
these cases, the minimum set of XML Schema constructs that needs to be
understood is known as the "basic schema language", which includes:

- targetNamespace
- element (including minOccurs and maxOccurs)
- attribute (including attribute use)
- complexType (only local definitions)
- simpleType (only local definitions)
- sequences
- all


TAPIR providers are not forced to guarantee the entire validity of
search responses according to the XML Schema defined in the response
structure, except to the extent of its own declared XML Schema
capabilities. When response structures are parsed, providers are
recommended to raise warnings instead of errors when an unsupported
XML Schema construct is found.

=== Output Model Mapping ===

Each data node in the output model structure must be mapped to one or
more concepts (<concept>), literals (<literal>) or system variables
(<variable>). The entire mapping is made of individual <node>
mappings, where the attribute @path takes a simple Xpath to identify
the output structure node. Individual mappings are completed by
specifying one or more sub-elements (<concept>|<literal>|<variable>)
associated to each node.

Node identifiers follow a subset of the XPath language using relative
location paths from the root element inside the schema definition
(inside <structure>) to the desired node. All steps are separated by
the "/" separator. The XPath expression used here is actually based on
the corresponding nodes of an instance document, and not the schema
definition itself. Attribute nodes need the prefix "@".

When multiple mappings are cited for the same node, the final result
must be the concatenation of the respective values.

```
<node path="/FeatureCollection/featureMember/LocationGML/Point/coordinates">
  <concept id="http://example.net/schema/Longitude" required="true"/>
  <literal value=","/>
  <concept id="http://example.net/schema/Latitude" required="true"/>
</node>
```
//Example: Concatenated concepts in an output model mapping//

When the response structure makes use of different namespaces, they
all need to be declared and associated to a prefix in the
"outputModel" element. In this case, node paths must include the
prefixes. The same applies to the "indexingElement" path.

```
<node path="/r:records/r:record/dc:modified">
  <concept id="http://example.net/schema/DateLastModified" required="true"/>
</node>
```
//Example: Node mapping involving different namespaces. Prefixes "r" and "dc" must be declared in the "outputModel" element//

Concepts and variables have an optional attribute "required" which
defaults to "false". When a concept is required but is either not
mapped by the provider or is mapped but evaluates to NULL, the
provider must return an error. When a variable is required and is
either not available from the provider or evaluates to NULL, the
provider must return an error. If a concept or variable is optional,
associated to a mandatory node, and is either not understood by the
provider or evaluates to NULL, the node must be included with an empty
content in the response. In this case it is recommended for providers
to raise a warning in the diagnostics. If a concept or variable is
optional, associated to an optional node, and is either not understood
by the provider or evaluates to NULL, the node must not be included in
the response. The resulting XML should always be "greedy", which means
that when a provider has content for a node, the node must always be
included in the response. The following table summarizes how providers
should behave in all possible situations.

||  @required  |  mandatory node (*)  |  provider has content (""**"")  |  no content (""**""*)  |
|  true  |  yes  |  include node  |  raise error  |
|  true  |  no  |  include node  |  raise error  |
|  false  |  yes  |  include node  |  include empty node & raise warning  |
|  false  |  no  |  include node  |  do not include node  |
(*) node is mandatory in response structure.

(**) action when provider has associated content.

(***) action when provider does not have associated content, or content is NULL.

In a concatenation, optional concepts or variables should be replaced
by an empty string if they evaluate to NULL or are not understood by
the provider.

The <mapping> element also includes an optional Boolean @automapping
attribute. When automapping is set to "true", nodes should be
automatically mapped to their equivalent concept identifiers (by
concatenating namespace and local path. This is done when the model’s
structural schema is also seen as a conceptual schema, therefore
avoiding redundant mappings. This kind of special model is also
referred to as a **canonical model**.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<outputModel xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
             xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
             xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
             xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                                 URL_TAPIR_XSD
                                 http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema
                                 http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema.xsd">
  <label>Specimen Records</label>
  <documentation>Simple output model for specimen data.</documentation>
  <structure>
    <xs:schema targetNamespace="http://example.net/simple_specimen">
      <xs:element name="dataset">
        <xs:complexType>
          <xs:sequence>
            <xs:element name="specimen" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded">
              <xs:complexType>
                <xs:sequence>
                  <xs:element name="identification" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded">
                    <xs:complexType>
                      <xs:sequence>
                        <xs:element name="name" type="xs:string"/>
                        <xs:element name="identifier" type="xs:string" minOccurs="0"/>
                      </xs:sequence>
                      <xs:attribute name="date" type="xs:string" use="optional"/>
                    </xs:complexType>
                  </xs:element>
                </xs:sequence>
                <xs:attribute name="catnum" type="xs:int" use="required"/>
              </xs:complexType>
            </xs:element>
          </xs:sequence>
        </xs:complexType>
      </xs:element>
    </xs:schema>
  </structure>
  <rootElement name="dataset"/>
  <indexingElement path="/dataset/specimen"/>
  <mapping>
    <node path="/dataset/specimen/@catnum">
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/CatalogNumber" required="true"/>
    </node>
    <node path="/dataset/specimen/identification/name">
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/ScientificName" required="true"/>
    </node>
    <node path="/dataset/specimen/identification/identifier">
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema2/PersonName"/>
    </node>
    <node path="/dataset/specimen/identification/@date">
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema2/DateText"/>
    </node>
  </mapping>
</outputModel>
```                       
//Example: A complete example of an output model showing the use of <structure>, <rootElement>, <indexingElement> and <mapping> elements//

== Query Templates ==

=== Inventory Templates ===

TAPIR inventory requests can refer to an inventory template document
which is accessed as an external resource by its URL. An inventory
template must be an XML document that validates against the
"inventoryTemplateType" defined in the TAPIR XML Schema. Inventory
template documents have a root element <inventoryTemplate> that
includes its namespace declarations. There are no header or diagnostic
sections in template documents.

Inventory templates can include optional (but recommended)
documentation elements for a name (<label>) and description
(<documentation>) that are of value in managing multiple templates and
informing users of their function. The body of an inventory template
includes a list of concepts upon which the inventory should be built
and an optional filter section which allows the use of client-supplied
parameters.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<inventoryTemplate xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
                   xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
                   xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                                       URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <label>Specimen Scientific Names</label>
  <documentation>Search and list unique scientific names of specimen 
  identifications ordered alphabetically. The parameter 
  "name" can be used as a filter condition indicating the 
  first characters of interest.</documentation>
  <concepts>
    <concept id="http://example.net/schema/ScientificName"/>
  </concepts>
  <filter>
    <like>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema/ScientificName"/>
      <parameter name="name"/>
    </like>
  </filter>
</inventoryTemplate>
```
//Example: A simple inventory template which allows the client to supply a scientific name (with wild cards if required) as a filter//

=== Search Templates ===

TAPIR search requests can refer to a search template document which is
accessed as an external resource by its URL. A search template must be
an XML document that is valid with respect to the "searchTemplateType"
defined in the TAPIR XML Schema.

Search templates can include optional (but recommended) documentation
elements for a name (<label>) and description (<documentation>) that
are of value in managing multiple templates and informing users of
their function. The body of a search template includes a choice of
external or internal output model and elements for refining, filtering
and ordering the search results, as follow:

: <outputModel>
Reference to an external output model document or inline definition of
an output model.

: <filter>
Optional element to specify filter conditions (see section about
Filters).

: <orderBy>
Optional repeatable element that can be used to declare one or more
concepts for ordering returned data. If the optional Boolean attribute
@descend is set to "true", a descending ordering will be used instead
of the default ascending one. The ordering behaviour is determined by
the concept datatype declared in the capabilities response.


```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<searchTemplate xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
                xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
                xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                                    URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <label>Specimen by Name</label>
  <documentation>Search specimens by their scientific name. Result is 
  ordered by name (ascending) and catalog number (descending). 
  A parameter "name" can be used to build the filter.</documentation>
  <externalOutputModel location="http://example.net/models/names.xml"/>
  <filter>
    <like>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema/ScientificName"/>
      <parameter name="name"/>
    </like>
  </filter>
  <orderBy>
    <concept id="http://example.net/schema/ScientificName"/>
    <concept id="http://example.net/schema/CatalogNumber" descend="true"/>
  </orderBy>
</searchTemplate>
```  
//Example: An XML search template definition based on an external output model.//

= Operations =

== Metadata ==

The Metadata operation retrieves a basic description of the TAPIR
service, such as its title, an abstract, keywords, related people and
organizations, and copyright details. The inclusion of a language
attribute in content elements allows content to be served in multiple
languages.

Metadata responses should include enough information to be used by
registries, such as UDDI, and to be used by other directory services
that need to know general information about the content
provided. Metadata are always related to a single TAPIR data provider,
which is regarded as a completely independent service.

=== Metadata Request ===

Metadata is the default operation in TAPIR. The simplest way to invoke
this operation is by calling the TAPIR access point directly without
any parameters.

Using XML, the Metadata operation can be invoked by inserting the
<metadata/> element after the header section in a request
document. Metadata requests take no arguments or parameters.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                             URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
    </source>
  </header>
  <metadata/>
</request>
```
//Example: Example of an XML metadata request document//

In KVP request encoding, the Metadata operation can be invoked with a single parameter:

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=metadata""

Or with no parameters at all:

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi""

=== Metadata Response ===

The structure of metadata responses must conform to the
"metadataResultType" defined in the TAPIR XML Schema. Many of the
elements in the "metadataResultType" are derived from the DC (Dublin
Core) schemas.

The "metadataResultType" also includes an optional @xml:lang attribute
to define a default language associated with all language-aware
elements. Language-aware elements are those elements whose content is
expressed in natural language. They are all unbounded and accept an
optional attribute @xml:lang to specify the related language code. The
language tag syntax of @xml:lang attributes is defined by the 
[RFC 4646, Tags for the Identification of Languages http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4646.txt] 
(based on ISO 639) and the list of codes can be found in the 
[IANA Language Subtag Registry http://www.iana.org/assignments/language-subtag-registry]. 
The @xml:lang attribute applies to the element that defines it and also to
all of its sub-elements. Sub-elements can also specify the @xml:lang
attribute, in which case it will override the default language defined
in the scope of any parent elements.

The metadata elements include;

: <dc:title> 
The name or names of the service, which may be in multiple languages
(using the xml:lang attribute to identify the language
code). String. Required.

: <dc:type>
The type of resource according to the 
[Dublin Core Type Vocabulary http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-type-vocabulary/]. 
This value should be the same for all TAPIR providers:
http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Service, unless the type vocabulary is
refined or changed in the future. The purpose is to indicate that the
resource is actually a service. String. Required.

: <accesspoint>
The URL of the service. String. Required.

: <dc:description>
The description may include, but is not limited to, an abstract, a
table of contents, a reference to a graphical representation of
content, or a free-text account of the content. Can be provided in
different languages. String. Required.

: <dc:language>
The language of content that can be returned by search and inventory
responses. This element must follow 
[RFC 4646 http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4646.txt] and use language codes
specified by the 
[IANA Language Subtag Registry http://www.iana.org/assignments/language-subtag-registry]. 
More than one language can be specified, in case the provider can serve content
in multiple languages. When there is no linguistic content the "zxx"
code must be used. String. Required.

: <dc:subject>
Subject and Keywords. Typically, a subject will be expressed as
keywords, key phrases or classification codes that describe content
provided by the resource. Recommended best practice is to select a
value from a controlled vocabulary or formal classification
scheme. String. Optional.

: <dc:bibliographicCitation>
Recommended practice is to include sufficient bibliographic detail to
identify the resource as unambiguously as possible, whether or not the
citation is in a standard form. Can be provided in different
languages. String. Optional.

: <rights>
Information about who can access the resource or about its security
status, access regulations, etc. String. Can be provided in different
languages. Optional.

: <dct:modified>
Date on which the service was last modified. Date string, optional.

: <dct:created>
Date on which the service was created. Date string, optional.

: <indexingPreferences>
Used to inform data aggregators and indexers about the preferred start
time, duration and frequency for performing this operation. Optional
element with three attributes:

 - **@startTime**: In the XML Schema time format.
 - **@maxDuration:** In the XML Schema duration format.
 - **@frequency:** In the XML Schema duration format.

: <relatedEntity>
A required, complex element indicating the entities related to the
service.

: <custom>
Optional element of any type to include any additional information
that goes beyond the standard TAPIR metadata.


==== Related Entities ====

Related Entities describe one or more entities and their roles with
respect to the service. In UDDI terms, TAPIR Related Entities
correspond to Business Entities. A Related Entity can be for example
the organization or group that is hosting the service, providing the
data, sponsoring the network, etc. This allows acknowledgement to any
kind of organization or even person that is somehow related to the
service.

Related Entities are defined by the "relatedEntityInformationType",
which is comprised of <role> and <entity> elements defined by the
"entityInformationType".

The elements defined by the "relatedEntityInformationType" are as
follow:

: <role>
Used to specify one or more roles of a related entity. The suggested
vocabulary includes two values, "data supplier" or "technical host",
but accepts other values. String. Required.

: <entity>
Required complex element with the following sub-nodes:

--indent--

: @type
Attribute indicating if the entity is an "organization" (default) or a
"person". String. Optional.

: <identifier>
A globally unique identifier for the entity. String. Optional.

: <name> 
One or more names for the organization. Includes an @xml:lang
attribute to record language. String. Required.

: <acronym>
The usual acronym for the organization. String. Optional.

: <logoURL>
A URL pointing to a small logo of the organization. String. Optional.

: <description>
Text description of the service. Includes an @xml:lang attribute to
record language. String. Optional.

: <address>
Text to indicate where the entity is located. It can include street
name, street number, district, city, county and other complements. Use
the next elements to specify state/province, country and zip
code. String. Optional.

: <regionCode>
Region (e.g., state or province) of the specified address. Use
standard abbreviation accepted in the country. String. Optional.

: <countryCode>
Country code 
([ISO 3166-1-alpha-2 http://www.iso.org/iso/iso-3166-1_decoding_table] 
code) of the specified address. String. Optional.

: <zipCode>
Zip or postal code of the specified address. String. Optional.

: <relatedInformation>
A URL that points to further information about the
entity. String. Optional.

: <hasContact>
Required complex element for details of individuals related to the
entity. Includes role and VCARD details (see Contacts).

: <geo:Point>
Optional complex element to indicate the entity location in decimal
degrees (datum WGS84). Conforms to the W3C Basic Geo Vocabulary.

 - **<geo:lat>**: Latitude in decimal degrees (WGS84). Float. Required.
 - **<geo:long>:** Longitude in decimal degrees (WGS84). Float. Required.
 - **<geo:alt>:** Altitude in meters. Float. Optional.	

: <custom>
Slot available for extending the scope of the entity information
provided. AnyType. Optional.


--unindent--

==== Contacts ====

Related entities must indicate at least one contact and its role.

: <role>
Used to specify one or more roles of a contact with respect to the
service. The suggested vocabulary includes two values, "data
administrator" or "system administrator", but accepts other
values. String. Required.

: <vcard:VCARD>
Complex element from the VCARD namespace for personal
details. Includes an @xml:lang attribute to record language.

--indent--

: <vcard:FN>
Free text non-atomised, full name of contact. Includes optional
@xml:lang attribute. String. Required.

: <vcard:TITLE>
Free text for contact's job title (e.g., "Director"). Includes
optional @xml:lang attribute. String. Optional.

: <vcard:TEL>
Free text for contact's telephone number. Includes optional @xml:lang
attribute and optional enumerated @TYPE attribute with any of the
values home, msg, work, pref, voice, fax, cell, pager, bbs, modem,
car, isdn, or pics. String. Optional.

: <vcard:EMAIL>
Text for contact's email. String. Optional.


--unindent--

: <custom>
Optional element that allows the inclusion of any additional
structured information related to the contact.


```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<response xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
          xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/"
          xmlns:dct="http://purl.org/dc/terms/"
          xmlns:geo="http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#"
          xmlns:vcard="http://www.w3.org/2001/vcard-rdf/3.0#"
          xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
          xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS 
                              URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source accesspoint="http://example.net/tapir.cgi" 
            sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
      <software name="TapirProvider" version="1.0"/>
    </source>
  </header>
  <metadata>
    <dc:title>Global Dragonflies Database</dc:title>
    <dc:type>http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Service</dc:type>
    <accesspoint>http://example.net/tapir.cgi</accesspoint>
    <dc:description>Global database about Dragonflies observation and specimen records</dc:description>
    <dc:language>en</dc:language>
    <dc:subject>dragonflies dragonfly observation specimen arthropoda insecta odonata</dc:subject>
    <dct:bibliographicCitation>Global Dragonflies Database</dct:bibliographicCitation>
    <dc:rights>Creative Commons License</dc:rights>
    <dct:modified>2006-07-01T09:35:14+01:00</dct:modified>
    <dct:created>2006-01-01T00:00:00+01:00</dct:created>
    <indexingPreferences startTime="01:30:00Z" maxDuration="PT1H" frequency="P1M" />
    <relatedEntity>
      <role>data supplier</role>
      <entity type="organization">
        <identifier>http://purl.org/biodiv/myorg</identifier>
        <name>My Organization</name>
        <acronym>MYORG</acronym>
        <logoURL>http://example.net/myorg.png</logoURL>
        <description>My Organization hosts and maintains biodiversity databases</description>
        <relatedInformation>http://example.net/myorg</relatedInformation>
        <hasContact>
          <role>data administrator</role>
          <vcard:VCARD>
            <vcard:FN>My Name</vcard:FN>
            <vcard:TITLE>Director</vcard:TITLE>
            <vcard:TEL>11 11 11111111</vcard:TEL>
            <vcard:EMAIL>myname@example.net</vcard:EMAIL>
          </vcard:VCARD>
        </hasContact>
        <geo:Point>
          <geo:lat>45.256</geo:lat>
          <geo:long>-71.92</geo:long>
        </geo:Point>
      </entity>
    </relatedEntity>
  </metadata>
</response>
```
//Example: Example of a metadata response document//

== Capabilities ==

The Capabilities operation is used to retrieve the essential settings
and technical information about a TAPIR service.

=== Capabilities Request ===

In XML, the Capabilities operation is invoked by inserting the
<capabilities/> element after the header section in a request
document. Capabilities requests take no arguments or parameters.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                             URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
    </source>
  </header>
  <capabilities/>
</request>
```
//Example: Example of an XML capabilities request document//

In KVP request encoding, the Capabilities operation can be invoked with a single parameter, as follows:

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=capabilities""

=== Capabilities Response ===

Capabilities responses contain five mandatory top level sections to
indicate available operations, supported request encodings and
parameters, mapped concepts, available variables and global settings.
An optional section <archives> can be used to indicate possible dump
files available. Another optional <custom> section can be used to
include any extra information not covered by the other sections.

==== Operations ====

The <operations> element is intended to return the list of operations
supported by the service, including optional capabilities that are
specific to each operation. When an operation is supported, an element
with the same name must be present inside the <operations>
element. Ping, metadata and capabilities are mandatory operations that
are simply declared with no further arguments.

```
<operations>
  <ping/>
  <metadata/>
  <capabilities/>
</operations>
```
//Example: A provider supporting only the mandatory operations//

A provider that supports the inventory operation must indicate one or
more supported inventory templates, or the <anyConcepts/>
capability. Providers that only support inventory templates should not
accept inventory requests that do not reference them. Each inventory
template must be indicated with a <template> element with an attribute
@location pointing to an external document defining the template. An
optional @alias attribute can be specified, in which case the alias
can also be used as the value of the template parameter in KVP
inventory requests. A WSDL (Web Service Description Language) document
describing the inventory template and its interface can optionally be
included with an attribute @wsdl.

```
<operations>
  <ping/>
  <metadata/>
  <capabilities/>
  <inventory>
    <templates>
      <template location="http://example.net/tmpl/collector_inventory.xml"/>
      <template location="http://example.net/tmpl/genus_inventory.xml"
                alias="genus_inventory"
                wsdl="http://example.net/tmpl/genus_inventory.wsdl" />
    </templates>
  </inventory>
</operations>
```
//Example: A provider supporting inventory with templates//

Providers declaring the <anyConcepts/> capability should accept
inventory requests involving one or more concepts that were advertised
as being mapped by the provider. They must also support inventory
requests involving any external inventory template that references any
known concepts. Therefore, providers in this situation must
additionally support arbitrary filters. The <anyConcepts/> capability
is declared without any further arguments.

```
<operations>
  <ping/>
  <metadata/>
  <capabilities/>
  <inventory>
    <anyConcepts/>
  </inventory>
</operations>
```
//Example: A provider supporting inventory in any concept//

Providers are also allowed to support both <anyConcepts/> and
templates, in case they wish to point to specific inventory templates
for any particular reason. However providers are not allowed to
advertise support of the inventory operation just with an empty
<inventory/> element.

If a provider supports the search operation, it must indicate either
one or more supported search templates, or the <outputModels/>
capability. Providers that only support search templates should not
accept search requests that do not reference them. Each search
template must be indicated with a <template> element having an
attribute @location pointing to an external document defining the
template. An optional @alias attribute can be specified, in which case
the alias can also be used as the value of the template parameter in
KVP search requests. A WSDL (Web Service Description Language)
document describing the search template and its interface can
optionally be included with an attribute @wsdl.

```
<operations>
  <ping/>
  <metadata/>
  <capabilities/>
  <inventory>
    <anyConcepts/>
  </inventory>
  <search>
    <templates>
      <template location="http://example.net/tmpl/search_by_taxonomy.xml"/>
      <template location="http://example.net/tmpl/search_by_geography.xml"
                alias="geo"
                wsdl="http://example.net/tmpl/search_by_geography.wsdl" />
    </templates>
  </search>
</operations>
```
//Example: A provider supporting search with templates//

Providers declaring the <outputModels/> capability should indicate
either one or more <knownOutputModels> or the <anyOutputModels>
capability. Both can be declared, but an empty <outputModels/> element
will be considered invalid.

Providers that only support a specific list of output models must
understand filters and "order by" parameters. But they can optionally
support the <anyOutputModels> capability. When a provider declares
support for a specific output model, it must be able to process any
search request that references that same output model, either directly
or through a search template. Known output models are declared with
the <outputModel> element with a @location attribute pointing to the
document defining it. An optional @alias attribute can be specified,
in which case the alias can be used as the value of the output model
parameter in KVP search requests.
 
```
<operations>
  <ping/>
  <metadata/>
  <capabilities/>
  <inventory>
    <anyConcepts/>
  </inventory>
  <search>
    <outputModels>
      <knownOutputModels>
        <outputModel location="http://example.net/models/taxonomy_rss.xml"/>
        <outputModel location="http://example.net/models/geography_kml.xml" alias="kml"/>
      </knownOutputModels>
    </outputModels>
  </search>
</operations>
```
//Example: A provider supporting search with known output models//

Providers may also declare the <anyOutputModels> capability, in which
case they need to indicate which subset of the XML Schema language
they understand. <anyOutputModels> refers to the ability to respond to
search requests involving arbitrary output model definitions, assuming
they make use of concepts that are mapped by the provider. Output
models include a response structure defined with XML Schema. XML
Schema is a large and very complex specification and TAPIR does not
expect providers to be able to understand or parse the whole
language. The minimum set of the XML Schema language that needs to be
understood by providers in this case is represented by the
<basicSchemaLanguage/> capability, and it includes the following
constructs of XML Schema: targetNamespace definition, element
definition (including minOccurs and maxOccurs), attribute definitions
(including attribute "use"), local definitions of complexType and
simpleType, sequences, and the "all" definition. Therefore, when a
provider declares the <anyOutputModel> capability, it must declare
inside it at least the element <basicSchemaLanguage/>.

```
<operations>
  <ping/>
  <metadata/>
  <capabilities/>
  <inventory>
    <anyConcepts/>
  </inventory>
  <search>
    <anyOutputModels>
      <responseStructure>
        <basicSchemaLanguage/>
        <import/>
      </responseStructure>
    </anyOutputModels>
  </search>
</operations>
```
//Example: A provider supporting search with any output models//

The following constructs of XML Schema can be optionally supported and
declared as part of the <anyOutputModels> element:

- choice
- group (local group definitions without global referencing)
- import
- include
- references
 - element
 - attribute
 - group
 - attributeGroup
 - complexType
 - simpleType
  - list
  - union
- simpleTypes
 - stringTypes
  - string
   - normalizedString
   - token
   - language
   - Name
   - NCName
   - NMToken
   - NMTokens
   - ID
   - IDREF
   - IDREFS
   - ENTITY
   - ENTITIES
 - numericTypes
  - float
  - double
  - decimal
  - integerTypes
   - integer
   - long
   - int
   - short
   - byte
   - positiveInteger
   - nonPositiveInteger
   - negativeInteger
   - nonNegativeInteger
   - unsignedLong
   - unsignedInt
   - unsignedShort
   - unsignedByte
 - dateTimeTypes
  - duration
  - dateTime
  - time
  - date
  - gYearMonth
  - gYear
  - gMonthDay
  - gDay
  - gMonth
 - miscTypes
  - Boolean
  - base64Binary
  - hexBinary
  - anyURI
  - QName
- extension
- restriction
 - minInclusive
 - maxInclusive
 - minExclusive
 - maxExclusive
 - fractionDigits
 - totalDigits
 - enumeration
 - whiteSpace
 - pattern
 - length
 - minLength
 - maxLength
- substitutionGroup
- constraints
 - field
 - selector
 - unique
 - key
 - keyref


Providers are allowed to support both search templates and output
models. However, they are not allowed to advertise support of the
search operation with an empty <search/> element.

When providers support search with output models they are also allowed
to support both <knownOutputModels> and <anyOutputModels>, but they
are not allowed to declare an empty <outputModels/> element.

Besides standard operations, providers can also declare they support
custom operations inside an optional <custom> element.

==== Requests ====

The <requests> element is intended to provide information on what
request encodings the service can respond to, whether it handles
log-only requests and what filter capabilities are supported.

This section includes three sub-sections:

: **<encoding>** 
Indicates what request encodings are supported. The options are <kvp/>
(Key-Value Pairs) and <xml/>. Support of key-value pairs is mandatory,
while the XML encoding is optional.

: **<globalParameters>**
Indicates if the provider "accepts", "requires" or "denies" log-only
requests.

: **<filter>**
Lists the expressions and Boolean operators understood by the provider
service and which may be used in constructing filters.


```
<requests>
  <encoding>
    <kvp/>
  </encoding>
  <globalParameters>	
    <logOnly>denied</logOnly>
  </globalParameters>
  <filter/>
</requests>
```
//Example: Fragment of a <requests> declaration in a capabilities response document showing the minimum functionality that a TAPIR service must be able to provide. Note that in this case no filter capabilities are declared.//

Filters are used in search and inventory operations. The <filter>
element in capabilities responses lists all the filter operations and
terms that are supported by the provider. When a provider declares the
filter <encoding> element, a minimum set of filtering capabilities
must be supported and indicated for the sake of clarity. The only
optional filtering capability in this case is related to the
arithmetic operators.

```
<requests>
  <encoding>
    <kvp/>
    <xml/>
  </encoding>
  <globalParameters>	
    <logOnly>accepted</logOnly>
  </globalParameters>
  <filter>
      <encoding>
        <expression>
          <concept/>
          <literal/>
          <parameter/>
          <variable/>
          <arithmetic>
            <add/>
            <sub/>
            <div/>
            <mul/>
          </arithmetic>
        </expression>
        <booleanOperators>
          <logical>
            <not/>
            <and/>
            <or/>
          </logical>
          <comparative>
            <equals caseSensitive="false"/>
            <greaterThan/>
            <greaterThanOrEquals/>
            <lessThan/>
            <lessThanOrEquals/>
            <in/>
            <isNull/>
            <like caseSensitive="false"/>
          </comparative>
        </booleanOperators>
      </encoding>
  </filter>
</requests>
```
//Example: A TAPIR provider declaring support to both xml and kvp encoding, accepting log-only requests, and declaring the complete filter functionality.//

When a provider supports filters, it can indicate if they are case
sensitive or not. When not indicated, it defaults to "true" (case
sensitive).

==== Concepts ====

The <concepts> element is intended to provide details of recognised
conceptual schemas and individually mapped concepts from those
schemas. At least one conceptual schema must be mapped with at least
one concept. The underlying database structure remains opaque to TAPIR
clients, which interact with the underlying database by reference to
the mapped concepts. Recognised conceptual schemas are declared using
the @namespace and @location attributes of the <schema> element, both
of which are required and must be valid URIs. An optional @alias can
be assigned to the schema.

Within each schema declaration the provider must list the recognised
concepts of that schema using the <mappedConcept> element. Each
concept is declared through an instance of the <mappedConcept>
element, which contains four attributes:

: @id
The fully qualified concept identifier. Required. String.

: @searchable
Denotes whether the concept can be used in filters. Optional (defaults
to "true"). Boolean.

: @required
Denotes that this is a mandatory concept that needs to be present in
output models of all search requests. Optional (defaults to
"false"). Boolean.

: @alias
A local alias associated with the concept. Optional. String.

: @datatype
Indicates the corresponding datatype of the mapped concept. This will
determine the ordering behaviour in results and the I/O data formats
supported by the provider for the concept. Must be one of the fully
qualified 
[XML Schema primitive datatypes http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#built-in-datatypes]. 
The datatype declared should always try to match the datatype defined by the
conceptual schema. If the conceptual schema uses a non primitive
datatype for the concept, this match should happen with the
corresponding primitive datatype (going back in the type
hierarchy). Optional (defaults to
""http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#string""). String.


```
<concepts>
  <schema namespace="http://example.net/s/1"
          location="http://example.net/s/1/schema.xsd">
    <mappedConcept id="http://example.net/s/1/CollectionCode"/>
    <mappedConcept id="http://example.net/s/1/CollectionName" searchable="false"/>
  </schema>
  <schema namespace="http://example.net/s/2"
          location="http://example.net/s/2/schema.xsd">
    <mappedConcept id="http://example.net/s/2/CatalogNumber" datatype="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#decimal"/>
    <mappedConcept id="http://example.net/s/2/Rights" required="true"/>
  </schema>
</concepts>
```
//Example: Example of a concepts declaration that might appear in a capabilities response document//

When a <mappedConcept> and its <schema> are declared with an @alias
attribute, providers must be able to understand requests that
reference the concept by the short notation:
concept_alias@schema_alias. When a <mappedConcept> is declared with an
@alias attribute but its <schema> is not, providers must be able to
understand requests that reference only the concept by its
alias. These two situations do not exempt providers from understanding
requests referencing concepts by fully qualified identifiers.

==== Variables ====

The <variables> element indicates system environment variables that
can be used as filter expressions (see section about filter
expressions). Each supported variable must be indicated with an
element of the same variable name inside the element
<environment>. When the <variables> element is empty it means that no
variables are supported.

```
<variables>
  <environment>
    <accessPoint/>
    <date/>
    <timestamp/>
    <metadataLanguage/>
    <dataSourceName/>
    <dataSourceDescription/>
    <subject/>
    <rights/>
    <bibliographicCitation/>
    <dataSourceLanguage/>
    <lastUpdate/>
    <dateCreated/>
    <technicalContactName/>
    <technicalContactEmail/>
    <contentContactName/>
    <contentContactEmail/>
  </environment>
 </variables>
```
//Example: Fragment of a capabilities response declaring all environmental variables defined by the TAPIR XML Schema and an extra one.//

==== Settings ====

The <settings> element indicates specific service settings related to
server overload caused by requests for excessive amounts of
data. There are five settings of interest to client software, all of
them optional, and further ones can be declared using the <custom>
element. The five settings all take positive integer values:

: minQueryTermLength
The minimum length of a wildcard string used in "like" expressions.

: maxElementRepetitions
The maximum number of repetitions allowed for any repeatable XML
elements in search and inventory responses. It can also be used as a
reference for paging.

: maxElementLevels
The maximum number of nested XML levels allowed for search responses
(not including the TAPIR envelope).

: maxResponseTags
The maximum number of XML tags that can be returned in responses.

: maxResponseSize
The maximum size in kilobytes allowed to be returned in responses.


```
<settings>
  <minQueryTermLength>2</minQueryTermLength>
  <maxElementRepetitions>100</maxElementRepetitions>
  <maxElementLevels>20</maxElementLevels>
</settings>
```
//Example: Fragment of a capabilities response showing service settings.//

==== Archives ====

An <archives> element can be used to advertise one or more dump files
available. A dump file contains all records from the provider at a
particular time and can be useful for clients that need to harvest
entire datasets. When a dump file is available, clients can make use
of it when interacting with the provider for the first time, and then
use incremental harvesting through the search operation in subsequent
interactions. Note that incremental harvesting will only be possible
if the provider has mapped some concept that indicates when a record
was last edited, and ideally another concept that indicates when a
record was deleted. Such concepts should be part of a data abstraction
layer and are therefore outside the scope of this specification.

Each dump file is represented by an <archive> element that can contain
the following attributes:

: @format
Format of the archive. It can be "xml" or any custom
value. Mandatory. String.

: @location
URL from where the archive can be downloaded. Mandatory. Any URI.

: @creation
Timestamp when the archive was created. Mandatory. DateTime.

: @compression
When the archive is compressed, this attribute must be present to
indicate the type of compression. When present, it can be "gzip" or
any custom value. When absent, no compression was
used. Optional. String.

: @numberOfRecords
Number of records in the archive. Mandatory. Integer.

: @outputModel
Output model used to generate the archive. This attribute should only
be present if the archive format is "xml". Optional. Any URI.


```
<archives>
  <archive format="xml" 
           location="http://example.net/file.gz" 
           creation="2005-10-31T12:23:56.023+01:00" 
           compression="gzip" 
           numberOfRecords="351056" 
           outputModel="http://example.net/model.xml"/>
</archives>
```
//Example: A provider advertising a dump file with all records at a specific time//

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<response xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
          xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
          xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS 
                              URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source accesspoint="http://example.net/tapir.cgi" 
            sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
      <software name="TapirProvider" version="1.0"/>
    </source>
  </header>
  <capabilities>
    <operations>
      <ping/>
      <metadata/>
      <capabilities/>
      <inventory>
        <anyConcepts/>
      </inventory>
      <search>
        <outputModels>
          <anyOutputModels>
            <responseStructure>
              </basicSchemaLanguage>
            </responseStructure>
          </anyOutputModels>
        </outputModels>
      </search>
    </operations>
    <requests>
      <encoding>
        <kvp/>
        <xml/>
      </encoding>
      <globalParameters>	
        <logOnly>accepted</logOnly>
      </globalParameters>
      <filter>
          <encoding>
            <expression>
              <concept/>
              <literal/>
              <parameter/>
              <variable/>
              <arithmetic/>
            </expression>
            <booleanOperators>
              <logical>
                <not/>
                <and/>
                <or/>
              </logical>
              <comparative>
                <equals caseSensitive="false"/>
                <greaterThan/>
                <greaterThanOrEquals/>
                <lessThan/>
                <lessThanOrEquals/>
                <in/>
                <isNull/>
                <like caseSensitive="false"/>
              </comparative>
            </booleanOperators>
          </encoding>
      </filter>
    </requests>
    <concepts>
      <schema namespace="http://example.net/s"
              location="http://example.net/s/schema.xsd">
        <mappedConcept id="http://example.net/s/CatalogNumber"/>
        <mappedConcept id="http://example.net/s/ScientificName"/>
      </schema>
    </concepts>
    <variables/>
    <settings>
      <minQueryTermLength>2</minQueryTermLength>
      <maxElementRepetitions>100</maxElementRepetitions>
      <maxElementLevels>20</maxElementLevels>
    </settings>
  </capabilities>
</response>
```
//Example: Example of a full capabilities response document containing only the mandatory sections//

== Inventory ==

The Inventory operation is used to retrieve distinct values for one or
more concepts specified as parameters. It returns aggregated data in
the mode of a DISTINCT select in SQL, as opposed to individual records
returned by the Search operation. When more than one concept is
specified, inventory responses must return distinct combinations of
values.

Concepts used as parameters may come from different conceptual schemas
and must be specified either with their fully qualified identifiers or
with aliases. If aliases are used, the TAPIR implementation must be
configured to use the relevant concept name server.

If a provider supports the inventory operation, it must advertise
either one or more inventory templates or support the <anyConcepts>
capability. Providers may support both options and choose how they
wish to process requests.

=== Inventory Request ===

Inventory requests can make use of inventory templates or may specify
the concept(s) and an optional filter directly in the message. Paging
parameters can also be used.

In XML, the inventory operation can be invoked by inserting the
<inventory> element after the header section in a request document,
and then specifying an inventory template or the specific parameters.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                             URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
    </source>
  </header>
  <inventory>
    <template location="http://example.net/tmpl/genus_inventory.xml"/>
  </inventory>
</request>
```
//Example: Example of an XML inventory request document using a template.//

In KVP request encoding, the same example could be invoked with:

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=inventory&template=""
""http://example.net/tmpl/genus_inventory.xml""

If the template included a filter with a parameter "type" restricting
results according to the basis of record, it could be invoked with

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=inventory&template=""
""http://example.net/tmpl/genus_inventory.xml&type=specimen""

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                             URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
    </source>
  </header>
  <inventory>
    <concepts>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/Country"/>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/Genus"/>
    </concepts>
  </inventory>
</request>
```
//Example: Example of an XML inventory request document (looking for unique combinations of genus and country) specifying concepts but no filter.//

In KVP request encoding, the same example could be invoked with

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=inventory&concept=http://example.net/schema1/Country&""
""concept=http://example.net/schema1/Genus""

or, using concept aliases

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=inventory&count=false&start=0&limit=100&""
""concept=Country@schema1&concept=Genus@schema1""

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                             URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
    </source>
  </header>
  <inventory count="true" limit="100" start="0">
    <concepts>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/Country" tagName="country"/>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/Genus" tagName="genus"/>
    </concepts>
    <filter>
      <like>
        <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/Genus"/>
        <literal value="Luzu*"/>
      </like>
    </filter>
  </inventory>
</request>
```
//Example: Example of an XML inventory request document (looking for unique combinations of genus and country) specifying concepts, custom tag names for the resulting values, paging parameters and a filter.//

In KVP request encoding, the same example could be invoked with

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=inventory&count=true&start=0&limit=100&""
""concept=Country@schema1&concept=Genus@schema1&tagname=country&tagname=genus&""
""filter=Genus@schema1 like "Luzu*"""

=== Inventory Response ===

The structure of inventory responses must conform to the
"inventoryResultType" defined in the TAPIR XML Schema. The body of the
inventory message must list the concepts used to create the inventory
using the <concepts> element. Individual inventory records, which
represent unique combinations of multiple concepts, are returned as
one or more <record> elements.

Each <record> element lists the value or values found in the order
that concepts are listed under <concepts>. If count was requested,
then each <record> must include an attribute @count, giving the number
of occurrences of this combination in the underlying data source. If
paging was requested, then a <summary> element must also be
returned. The order of <record> elements should be ascending according
to the concept's datatype declared in the capabilities response.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<response xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
          xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
          xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS 
                              URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source accesspoint="http://example.net/tapir.cgi" 
            sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
      <software name="TapirService" version="1.0"/>
    </source>
  </header>
  <inventory>
    <concepts>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/Country"/>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/Genus"/>
    </concepts>
    <record>
      <value>AUSTRALIA</value>
      <value>Calicium</value>
    </record>
    <record>
      <value>AUSTRALIA</value>
      <value>Fellhanera</value>
    </record>
    <summary start="0" next="2" totalReturned="2" totalMatched="35"/>
  </inventory>
</response>
```
//Example: An inventory response showing country and genus combinations//

If the request references an unmapped concept an <error> should be returned.

When the request specifies a custom "tagName" for the concept, then
this name should be used instead of the default <value> tag.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<response xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
          xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
          xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS 
                              URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source accesspoint="http://example.net/tapir.cgi" 
            sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
      <software name="TapirService" version="1.0"/>
    </source>
  </header>
  <inventory>
    <concepts>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/Country"/>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema1/Genus"/>
    </concepts>
    <record>
      <country>AUSTRALIA</country>
      <genus>Calicium</genus>
    </record>
    <record>
      <country>AUSTRALIA</country>
      <genus>Fellhanera</genus>
    </record>
    <summary start="0" next="2" totalReturned="2" totalMatched="35"/>
  </inventory>
</response>
```
//Example: An inventory response showing country and genus combinations with values enclosed by custom tag names//

== Search ==

The Search operation is used to return non-aggregate records from data
sources. Search requests make use of output models and filters to
select the requested data. The returned records may also be counted
and paged.

If a provider supports the search operation, it must advertise either
one or more search templates or it must support the <outputModels>
capability. Providers may support both options and choose how they
wish to process requests. If a provider supports the <outputModels>
capability, it must advertise either one or more known output models
or it must support the <anyOutputModels> capability.

=== Search Request ===

Search requests can make use of search templates or specify all
parameters directly in the message. Paging parameters can also be
used.

In XML, the search operation can be invoked by inserting the <search>
element after the header section in a request document, and then
specifying a search template or the specific parameters.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                             URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
    </source>
  </header>
  <search>
    <template location="http://example.net/tmpl/search_by_taxon.xml"/>
  </search>
</request>
```
//Example: Example of an XML search request document using a template.//

In KVP request encoding, the same example could be invoked with

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=search&template=""
""http://example.net/tmpl/search_by_taxon.xml""

If the template included a filter with a parameter "genus" restricting
results according to a specified genus name, it could be invoked with

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=search&template=""
""http://example.net/tmpl/search_by_taxon.xml&genus=Physalis""

In addition to referring to external output models (both those known
to the provider and user defined ones) by their URI, it is possible to
declare an output structure directly within a request document through
the <outputModel> element, whose structure is exactly as that used in
external models.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS" 
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                             URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00"/>
  </header>
  <search count="true" start="0" limit="1000">
    <outputModel>
      <structure>... concepts and relationships ... </structure>
      <rootElement name="... name of global element ..."/>
      <indexingElement path="... node path(s) for paging and counting ..."/>
      <mapping>... concept mapping elements ...</mapping>
    </outputModel>
    <filter>
      <like>
        <concept id="http://example.net/schema/ScientificName"/>
        <literal value="Luzu*"/>
      </like>
    </filter>
    <orderBy>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema/Family"/>
      <concept id="http://example.net/schema/ScientificName"/>
    </orderBy>
  </search>
</request>
```
//Example: Simplified example of an XML search document with in-line outputModel definition//

When used in KVP encoding, output models must always be externally
defined, and referenced by the parameter "model". Output model
definitions cannot be encoded in KVP.

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=search&start=0&limit=10&""
""model=http://example.net/models/specimens.xml&filter=""
""http://example.net/schema/ScientificName like "Luzu*"&orderby=""
""http://example.net/schema/ScientificName""

The same example with concept aliases would be

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=search&start=0&limit=10&""
""model=http://example.net/models/specimens.xml&filter=""
""ScientificName@schema like "Luzu*"&orderby=""
""ScientificName@schema""

Search operations also include the possibility to remove the TAPIR
envelope, i.e., only the content that goes inside the "search" element
is returned. This can be specified by the parameter "envelope". In XML
it is an optional attribute (defaults to false) of the element search,
and in KVP it is an independent parameter with the same name.

If an error occurs when the envelope in turned off, the response
should be an "error" element containg the error message. It should
usually be possible to get more information about the error by sending
another request with envelope turned on and then inspecting the
diagnostics.

=== Search Response ===

All methods of formulating search queries are processed by the
provider software to select data from its underlying data source and
to return to the client in the form of an XML response message. The
way in which the provider chooses to do this is not defined by the
protocol. Search responses with the TAPIR envelope must validate
against the "searchResultType" defined by the TAPIR XML Schema.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<response xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
          xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
          xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                              URL_TAPIR_XSD">
  <header>
    <source accesspoint="http://example.net/tapir.cgi" 
            sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00"/>
  </header>
  <search>
    <dataset xmlns="http://example.net/simple_specimen">
      <specimen catnum="234">
         <identification>
           <name>Luzula luzuloides</name>
         </identification>
      </specimen>
      <specimen catnum="290">
        <identification>
          <name>Luzula alpestris</name>
        </identification>
      </specimen>
    </dataset>
    <summary start="0" totalReturned="2"/>
  </search>
</response>
```
//Example: Example of a search response document.//

== Ping ==

The Ping operation provides a means of establishing whether services
are currently on-line and whether appropriate wrapper software is
installed. This operation can also provide basic data about response
times. It does not require a query to be run against a connected
database, as is sometimes required of metadata and capabilities
requests. Data providers are free to include as part of diagnostics
any extra information that may be of value to monitor networks.

=== Ping Request ===

In XML, the ping operation is invoked by inserting the <ping/> element
after the header section in a request document. Ping takes no
arguments or parameters.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<request xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
                xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
                xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
                                    URL_TAPIR_XSD">
<header>
  <source sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:56.023+01:00">
       <software name="TapirClient" version="1.0"/>
  </source>
</header>
  <ping/>
</request> 
```
//Example: TAPIR Ping Request. The simplest operation in TAPIR.//

In KVP request encoding, the ping operation can be invoked with a
single parameter

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=ping""

=== Ping Response ===

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<response xmlns="URL_TAPIR_NS"
          xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
          xsi:schemaLocation="URL_TAPIR_NS
          URL_TAPIR_XSD">
<header>
  <source accesspoint="http://example.net/tapir.cgi" 
          sendtime="2005-11-11T12:23:57.023+01:00">
       <software name="TapirProvider" version="1.0"/>
  </source>
</header>
  <pong/>
</response> 
```

= Global Parameters =

All operations can make use of global common parameters. In XML,
global parameters are passed as specific attribute values of the
operation element, and are defined in the "globalParametersGroup". In
KVP, they are passed as individual parameters. The list of global
parameters include:

: log-only
The log-only parameter can be used to instruct the service to log the
request but not process it as it would normally do. It can be used to
forward requests to the original providers, when users are querying
third-party cached databases. This way, original providers can track
usage of their data. Although it is possible to send log-only
requests, clients must check the provider capabilities response before
sending them. The <globalParameters> element of capabilities responses
declares if log requests are required, accepted or denied. Providers
that are unable to log requests on their system or do not want to
receive them, should reply to a log-only request with an error message
using the <error> element. If log-only requests are accepted or
required, then the response must include the element <logged/>
instead. Boolean. Optional (defaults to "false").

: xslt
The xslt parameter points to an XML style sheet that can be used by
XSLT processors to transform TAPIR responses. When xslt is specified,
providers are instructed to include the corresponding "xml-stylesheet"
processing instruction after the XML header, as shown below. However,
providers are also free to place restrictions on the allowable domains
related to the stylesheet location. In this case, if a stylesheet
comes from an unknown location, it can be ignored - but an associated
warning should be raised inside the diagnostics section. String
representing a URL. Optional.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<?xml-stylesheet type="text/xsl" href="http://example.net/trans.xsl"?>
<!-- TAPIR response -->
```
//Example: Fragment of a TAPIR response showing the XML headers when the xslt parameter is passed.//


= Counting and Paging =

Inventory and search operations include counting and paging
functionality. Both are done with reference to an indexing element
(search operation) or to a record element (inventory operation). In
XML, counting and paging parameters are defined in the
"pagingParametersGroup" and passed as attribute values of the
operation element. In KVP, counting and paging is done through
specific individual parameters.

: count
For Inventory operations the count parameter instructs the service to
return the total number of distinct records and number of occurrences
of each record matching the selection criteria. For search operations,
the count parameter instructs the service to return the number of
records returned and the number of records that matched the query in
the @returned and @totalMatched attributes of the <summary> element
respectively. Boolean. Optional (default = "false")

: start
Index of the first record to be returned when paging
results. Non-negative integer. Optional (default = "0", which
corresponds to the index of the first record).

: limit
Indicates the maximum number of records to be returned when paging
results. If a request asks for count but specifies limit = "0" then no
records are returned but the total number of records found is recorded
in @totalMatched. Non-negative integer. Optional (when not specified
it means "unlimited").
	

In XML, a typical use of paging parameters attributes would be

```
  <search count="true" start="0" limit="50">
   ....... 
  </search>
```

The same parameters in KVP would be

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=search&count=1&start=0&limit=50&...""

When paging is requested, response documents must include a <summary>
element of the "resultSummaryType", which returns information in the
following set of attributes:

: @start
Index of the first element that was returned.

: @next
Index of the next record that could be retrieved using a subsequent
request.

: @totalReturned
The number of records actually being returned.

: @totalMatched
If count was requested the totalMatched attribute gives the
"estimated" number of total matching records - not necessarily the
number of valid records that can possibly be returned by paging
through the entire record set. This happens because records can be
"dropped" or ignored if they fail to produce a valid XML
representation according to the response structure.


```
...
<record count="10">
  <value>AUSTRALIA</value>
  <value>Calicium</value>
</record>
<record count="20" >
  <value>AUSTRALIA</value>
  <value>Fellhanera</value>
</record>
<summary start="0" next="2" totalReturned="2" totalMatched="35"/>
...
```
//Example: Fragment of an inventory response showing count and paging values.//

= Filters, Expressions and Operators =

== Filters ==

Inventory and search operations may contain a filter specifying
conditions to restrict returned data to a specific subset. TAPIR
filters encode expressions and operators in an atomised form that can
be translated to other query languages (e.g., SQL).

The ability to dynamically parse filters is optional in TAPIR and can
be expressed as part of the capabilities response. Providers that do
not support filters may still support query templates advertised in
their capabilities. In this case, when the query template includes a
filter in its definition, the meaning and the functionality of the
filter must be understood by the provider. The provider may hard code
a local query that translates the entire filter and then, when
processing a request, substitute parameters that are usually present
in query template's filters with their respective values.

== Expressions ==

The atomised values in a TAPIR filter are represented by
expressions. There are three types of expressions in TAPIR: simple
expressions, complex expressions and variables. Expressions evaluate
to a single value and are used by filter operators.

=== Simple Expressions ===

Simple expressions include elements that are directly associated with
a single value. There are three possible types of simple expressions:

- **Literal:** Any string. In XML, literals are represented by a
<literal> element that must include the respective value in the
attribute @value:

```
 <literal value="42" />
```

- **Concept:** An element representing a concept from a conceptual
schema. When used in filters, concepts must be related to a property
or attribute that can be associated with a specific content in a local
data source. In XML, a concept expression is represented by a
<concept> element that must contain the concept identifier in the
attribute @id:

```
<concept id="http://example.net/concept/scientificName" />
```

- **Parameter:** An element that can be used to point to external
values provided by the calling message. In XML, parameters are
represented by the element <parameter> that must include the parameter
name in the attribute @name:

```
<parameter name="sname" />
```

The expression above instructs a program to get the value from the
respective HTTP GET or HTTP POST parameter. Considering the GET
request below, the previous example would evaluate to the literal
value "Helix":

""http://example.net/wrapper.cgi?op=search&template=http://example.net/tmpl&sname=Helix""

Attention is required to choose parameter names that do not conflict
with the reserved TAPIR parameters. Any name from the list of reserved
parameters is not allowed to be present in filters.


=== Complex Expressions ===

Complex expressions are represented by four arithmetic operators. The
list below shows the arithmetic operators followed by their respective
XML element.

- **add:**       <add>
- **divide:**    <div>
- **multiply:**  <mul>
- **subtract:**  <sub>


Arithmetic operators are binary, so they always combine exactly two
expressions as their arguments. The first argument must always be
associated with the leftmost expression in the operation. This means
that in subtractions the first expression corresponds to the minuend
and the second corresponds to the subtrahend. In divisions the first
expression corresponds to the divident while the second corresponds to
the divisor.

```
<add>
  <literal value="20" />
  <literal value="22" />
</add>
```
//Example: Use of a binary arithmetic operator.// 

=== Variables ===

Variables are elements that represent environment variables from the
data provider system. TAPIR defines the following system variables
that may be supported by provider implementations:

- **date:** Represents the current date according to the XML Schema
date type (ISO 8601). Example: 2006-07-21

- **timestamp:** Represents the current timestamp according to the XML
Schema dateTime type (ISO 8601). Example: 2006-07-20T17:01:38+02:00

- **accessPoint:** Represents the service access point.

- **dataSourceName:** Represents the name of the data source (the
service "title" as advertised in metadata responses).

- **dataSourceDescription:** Represents the description of the data
source (the service "description" as advertised in metadata
responses).

- **subject:** Keywords, key phrases or classification codes that
describe content provided by the data source (the service "subject" as
advertised in metadata responses).

- **rights:** Information about who can access the resource or about
its security status, access regulations, etc. (the service "rights" as
advertised in metadata responses).

- **bibliographicCitation:** Information about how to cite the data
source (the service "bibliographicCitation" as advertised in metadata
responses).

- **metadataLanguage:** The language in which the content of the
following variables are expressed: dataSourceName,
dataSourceDescription, rights, subject and bibliographicCitation..

- **dataSourceLanguage:** The primary language of the data provided by
the service (the first "dc:language" element advertised in metadata
responses).

- **technicalContactName:** The name of the first system administrator
of the first technical host entity in metadata responses.

- **technicalContactEmail:** The e-mail of the first system
administrator of the first technical host entity in metadata
responses.

- **contentContactName:** The name of the first data administrator of
the first data supplier entity in metadata responses.

- **contentContactEmail:** The e-mail of the first data administrator
of the first data supplier entity in metadata responses.

- **lastUpdate:** Represents the timestamp when the underlying data
was last updated. Format must follow the XML Schema dateTime type (ISO
8601).

- **dateCreated:** Represents the timestamp when the data source was
created. Format must follow the XML Schema dateTime type (ISO 8601).


In XML, variables are represented by a <variable> element with a
"name" attribute, such as

```
<variable name="date" />
```

Variables that are supported by a data provider must be advertised in
capabilities responses. Data providers are also free to define and
make use of additional system variables.

== Logical and Comparative Operators ==

TAPIR supports a range of Boolean (logical and comparative) operators
for building filters.

=== Comparative Operators ===

There are three types of comparative operators - unary, binary, and
multiple.

==== Unary Comparative Operators ====

Unary comparative operators always take a single concept as
argument. The only operator of this type is the isNull operator.

- **isNull:** Evaluates to true if the value associated with the
concept is NULL. In XML, this operator is represented by the element
<isNull>.

```
<isNull>
  <concept id="http://example.net/concept/country" />
</isNull>
```


==== Binary Comparative Operators ====

Binary comparative operators always compare a concept with an
expression. The first argument must always be the concept and is
associated with the leftmost expression in the operation. The
following operators are binary:

- **equals:** The "equals" (=) comparison operator. When used in
string comparisons, case sensitivity is indicated as part of the
capabilities response. In XML, this operator is represented by the
element <equals>.

```
<equals>
  <concept id="http://example.net/concept/genus" />
  <literal value="Rubus" />
</equals>
```

- **like:** The "like" operator used in character string
comparisons. It checks if a string value matches a given pattern. The
wildcard is represented by the character "*". Case sensitiveness is
indicated as part of the capabilities response. In XML, this operator
is represented by the element <like>. Not specifying any wildcard in
the corresponding literal is equivalent to specifying two wildcards:
one in the beginning and the other in the end of the literal
value. When the character "*" is not meant to be a wildcard, it should
be escaped by including "_" before the "*" character.

```
<like>
  <concept id="http://example.net/concept/commonName" />
  <literal value="*thrush" />
</like>
```

- **greaterThan:** The greater than (>) comparison operator. In XML,
this operator is represented by the element <greaterThan>.

```
<greaterThan>
  <concept id="http://example.net/concept/yearCollected" />
  <literal value="1990" />
</greaterThan>
```

- **greaterThanOrEquals:** The greater than or equals (>=) comparison
operator. In XML, this operator is represented by the element
<greaterThanOrEquals>.

```
<greaterThanOrEquals>
  <concept id="http://example.net/concept/individualCount" />
  <literal value="3" />
</greaterThanOrEquals>
```

- **lessThan:** The less than (<) comparison operator. In XML, this
operator is represented by the element <lessThan>.

```
<lessThan>
  <concept id="http://example.net/concept/yearCollected" />
  <literal value="1870" />
</lessThan>
```

- **lessThanOrEquals:** The less than or equals (<=) comparison
operator. In XML, this operator is represented by the element
<lessThanOrEquals>.

```
<lessThanOrEquals>
  <concept id="http://example.net/concept/altitude" />
  <literal value="500" />
</lessThanOrEquals>
```


==== Multiple Comparative Operators ====

Multiple comparative operators always compare a concept with one or
more simple expressions. This operator is equivalent to a sequence of
"or" operators comprising equals comparisons between the concept and
each simple expression. The only operator of this type is the "in"
operator.

- **in:** The "in" operator checks if a concept is equals to one of
the values in a list. When used in string comparisons, case
sensitivity is indicated as part of the capabilities response of the
equals operator. In XML, this operator is represented by the element
<in>.

```
<in>
  <concept id="http://example.net/concept/basisOfRecord" />
  <values>
    <literal value="specimen" />
    <literal value="observation" />
  </values>
</in>
```


=== Logical operators ===

There are two types of logical operators – unary and multiple.

==== Unary Logical Operators ====

Unary logical operators take as argument a single Boolean operator,
which can be any comparison operator or any logical operator.

- **not:** This operator specifies that matching records must not meet
the specified condition. In XML, this operator is represented by the
element <not>.

```
<not>
  <like>
    <concept id="http://example.net/concepts/speciesName"/>
    <literal value = "Helix*"/>
  </like>
</not>
```


==== Multiple Logical Operators ====

Multiple logical operators combine two or more Boolean operators,
which can be any comparison operator or any logical operator.

- **and:** The "and" operator is used to connect two or more Boolean
conditions, which must all evaluate to true in order for the composite
to be true. In XML, this operator is represented by the element <and>.

```
<and>
  <equals>
    <concept id="http://example.net/concept/genus" />
    <parameter name="genus" />
  </equals>
  <equals>
    <concept id="http://example.net/concept/species" />
    <parameter name="species" />
  </equals>
  <equals>
    <concept id="http://example.net/concept/subspecies" />
    <parameter name="subspecies" />
  </equals>
</and>
```

- **or:** The "or" operator is used to connect two or more Boolean
conditions. The compound condition evaluates to true if at least one
of the conditions evaluates to true. In XML, this operator is
represented by the element <or>.

```
<or>
  <lessThan>
    <concept id="http://example.net/concept/latitude" />
    <literal value="-90.00" />
  </lessThan>
  <greaterThan>
    <concept id="http://example.net/concept/latitude" />
    <literal name="90.00" />
  </greaterThan>
</or>
```


== Additional Interpretation Rules ==

When a TAPIR provider receives a request, there are additional rules
that need to be followed when interpreting filters:

- A comparative operator that references an unspecified parameter must
be ignored (as if it was not part of the filter).
- A comparative operator must always evaluate to false when it
references a concept that is not understood by the provider (i.e., the
concept is not listed as a mapped concept in the capabilities
response), unless the comparative operator also references an
unspecified parameter - in which case the operator must be ignored
instead.
- When ignoring a comparative operator, if it was part of a logical
operator then the logical operator should also be ignored if there are
no boolean (logical or comparative) operators left inside.
- When ignoring a logical operator, if it was part of another logical
operator, then the outer logical operator should also be ignored if
there are no boolean (logical or comparative) operators left inside.


= KVP (Key-Value Pair) Requests =

TAPIR requests can be encoded as KVP, as opposed to the XML encoding,
and can be sent through HTTP GET or HTTP POST. Therefore, interaction
with a TAPIR service can be done by means of URLs using CGI-style
parameters. For instance, to ping a TAPIR service one can use the
simple KVP GET encoded message

""http://example.net/tapir.cgi?op=ping""

All TAPIR operations can be invoked with KVP, though output model
definitions cannot be expressed with KVP.

== Parameter Rules ==

Parameter names are always case insensitive. Parameter values are case
insensitive by default, except when used with "equals" or "like"
comparisons and the provider explicitly declared these operators to be
case sensitive (see capabilities response for more details).

Parameters may be specified in any order. Any unknown parameters can
be ignored. Parameters without values can also be ignored.

When creating custom parameters in filters, it is necessary to make
sure that their names do not conflict with TAPIR specific parameters
(see Appendix for the full list of reserved parameter names).

== Global Parameters ==

The following parameters can be used in all TAPIR operations:

: op = [ p | ping | m | metadata | c | capabilities | i | inventory | s | search ]
Specifies the requested TAPIR operation.

 - default = metadata : if op is not specified the service must send back a metadata response
 - cardinality = 1..1 : only one operation is allowed per request

: xslt = [ URI ]
Gives the address of an XML style sheet to be included after the XML
header.

 - default = null 
 - cardinality = 0..1

: log-only = [ true | false | 1 | 0 ]
Used to indicate if the request should only be logged, not
processed. Returns a log message instead of data.

 - default = false
 - cardinality = 0..1

: source-ip = [ URI | NONE ]
Used to indicate the IP address of the original client when the
message was processed by intermediate agents.

 - default = null
 - cardinality = 0..1


== Ping Parameters ==

: op = [ ping | p ]
The ping request has no other parameters.


== Metadata Parameters ==

: op = [ metadata | m ]
The metadata request has no other parameters.


== Capabilities Parameters ==

: op = [ capabilities | c ]
The capabilities request has no other parameters


== Inventory Parameters ==

: op = [ inventory | i ] 

: cnt, count ::= [ true | false | 1 | 0 | NONE ]
Indicates if the total number of distinct records and the number of
occurrences for each record must be returned.
 - default = false
 - cardinality = 0..1

: s, start = [ non-negative integer | NONE ]
Index of the first record to be returned.
 - default = 0 (defaults to the first record in the matching data)
 - cardinality = 0..1

: l, limit = [ non-negative integer | NONE ]
The number of records to be returned.
 - default = NONE (all matching records are returned by default)
 - cardinality = 0..1


A choice must be made to use either a template, or one or more direct
references to concepts with an optional filter.

: t, template = [ URI | string ]
The URL of an Inventory Template document or an alias of a template
declared in the capabilities response. When a template is present the
concept and filter parameters are ignored.
 - default = null
 - cardinality = 0..1 (optional and only one template is allowed)


OR

: c, concept = [ fully qualified identifiers or aliases ]
One or more concepts.
 - default = UNDEFINED (which must be interpreted by any provider
implementation to mean no concept, which will result in an empty
response)
 - cardinality = 0..n (at least one concept must be included if no
template is specified)

: n, tagname = [ string ]
One or more custom tag names (one for each concept).
 - default = "value"
 - cardinality = 0..n (optional, but when specified there must be one
tagname for each concept)

: f, filter = [ expression ]
A KVP filter.
 - default = null (no filter used)
 - cardinality = 0..1 (optional and only one filter statement is
allowed)


== Search Parameters == 

: op = [ search | s ]
	
: cnt, count = [ true | false | 1 | 0 | NONE ]
Indicates if the count of the records returned in the response and the
number of matching records should be returned.
 - default = false
 - cardinality = 0..1

: s, start = [ non-negative integer | NONE ]
Index of the first record to be returned.
 - default = 0 (defaults to the first record in the matching data)
 - cardinality = 0..1

: l, limit = [ non-negative integer | NONE ]
The number of records to return.
 - default = NONE (all matching records are returned by default)
 - cardinality=0..1

: e, envelope = [ true | false | 1 | 0 | NONE ]
Indicates if the TAPIR envelope (response, header, search, summary and
diagnostics tags) should be suppressed or not.
 - default = true 
 - cardinality = 0..1


A choice must be made to use either a template, or an output model
parameter with optional "filter" and "orderby" parameters. The
"template" parameter takes precedence over the "model" so if both are
present the "model" and the optional "filter" and "orderby" parameters
should be ignored.
 
: t, template = [ URI | string ]
The URL of a Search Template document or an alias of a template
declared in the capabilities response. When a template is present, the
model, filter, orderby and descend parameters should be ignored.
 - default = null
 - cardinality = 0..1


OR

: m, model = [ URI | string ]
The URL of an output model document or an alias of an output model
declared in the capabilities response.
 - default = null 
 - cardinality=0..1 (when both template and model are present, the
model parameter must be ignored)

: f, filter = [ expression ]
A KVP filter.
 - default = null
 - cardinality = 0..1

: o, orderby = [ fully qualified concept identifiers or aliases ]
One or more concept identifiers to order results.
 - default = null (no particular order)
 - cardinality = 0..n

: d, descend = [ true | false | 1 | 0 ]
Indicates if the order should be ascending or descending for each
concept specified in "orderby". When present, it must have the same
number of instances of "orderby".
 - default = false (ascending order)
 - cardinality = 0..n


== Filters ==

Filter expressions in KVP requests will be infix equivalents to their
XML counterparts.

=== Backus-Naur Form (BNF) Grammar for Filter Expressions ===

```
<expression>                    ::= <logical_operator> | <comparative_operator>

<comparative_operator>          ::= <unary_comparison_expression> |
                                    <binary_comparison_expression> | 
                                    <unbound_comparison_expression>

<logical_operator>              ::= <unary_logical_expression> | <binary_logical_expression>

<literal>                       ::= '"' <string> '"'

<concept>                       ::= <concept_alias> | <qualified_concept>

<concept_alias>                 ::= <local_concept_alias> "@" <namespace_alias>

<local_concept_alias>           ::= <string>

<namespace_alias>               ::= <string>

<qualified_concept>             ::= <string>

<value>                         ::= <literal> | <concept> | <arithmetic_expression>

<arithmetic_expression>         ::= <value> <arithmetic_operator> <value>

<unary_comparison_expression>   ::= <unary_comparison_operator> <concept>

<binary_comparison_expression>  ::= <value> <binary_comparison_operator> <value>

<unbound_comparison_expression> ::= <unbound_comparison_operator> <expression> {<expression>}

<unary_logical_expression>      ::= <unary_logical_operator> <expression>

<binary_logical_expression>     ::= <expression> <binary_logical_operator> <expression>

<unary_comparison_operator>     ::= "isNull"

<binary_comparison_operator>    ::= "equals" | "like" | "greaterThan" | "lessThan" | 
                                    "greaterThanOrEquals" | "lessThanOrEquals"

<unbound_comparison_operator>   ::= "in"

<unary_logical_operator>        ::= "not"

<binary_logical_operator>       ::= "and" | "or"

<arithmetic_operator>           ::= <add> | <div> | <mul> | <sub>

<add>                           ::= "+"
<sub>                           ::= "-"
<mul>                           ::= "*"
<div>                           ::= "/"

<string>                        ::= <any_char> { <any_char> }
```

=== Operators Precedence ===

Following are lists showing the precedence of filter operators:
: expressions
arithmetic_operator, comparative_operator, logical_operator
: arithmetic_operators
mul, div, add, sub
: comparative_operators
isNull, equals, like, greaterThan, lessThan, greaterThanOrEquals, lessThanOrEquals
: logical_operators
not, and, or


Blocks can be formed by using simple parentheses ( ).

=== Examples ===

```
isnull country@cs1 or FullScientificName@cs2 like "Abies*" and country@cs1 equals "Spain"
```

The same example can be more explicit using parentheses, as follows:

```
((isnull country@cs1) or ((FullScientificName@cs2 like "Abies*") and (country@cs1 equals "Spain")))
```

= The TAPIR XML Schema =

The official version of the TAPIR XML Schema (tdwg_tapir.xsd) is located at:

URL_TAPIR_XSD

= Appendix =

== Reserved Parameter Names ==

Parameter names defined in filters can be any string valid according
to the HTTP Common Gateway Interface (CGI) standard. But as TAPIR
operations can be called through pure KVP requests, some parameter
names are reserved as TAPIR parameters and cannot be used as parameter
names in filters.

The following parameter names are reserved for TAPIR:

```
c
cnt
concept
count
descend
d
e
envelope
f
filter
l
limit
log-only
m
model
n
o
op
orderby
s
start
t
tagname
template
xslt
```

== Simple XML Encoding for Conceptual Schemas ==

The following XML Schema defines a standard encoding that can be used
to describe conceptual schemas:

```
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<xsd:schema targetNamespace="http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/cns/1.0" 
            xmlns="http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/cns/1.0" 
            xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
            elementFormDefault="qualified" 
            attributeFormDefault="unqualified" xml:lang="en" >
  <xsd:annotation>
    <xsd:documentation>
      Simple XML Encoding to describe Conceptual Schemas used by TAPIR networks.
    </xsd:documentation>
  </xsd:annotation>
  <xsd:element name="cns">
    <xsd:annotation>
      <xsd:documentation>
        Root element consisting of one schema element.
      </xsd:documentation>
    </xsd:annotation>
    <xsd:complexType>
      <xsd:sequence>
        <xsd:element name="schema" type="conceptualSchemaType"/>
      </xsd:sequence>
    </xsd:complexType>
  </xsd:element>
  <xsd:complexType name="conceptualSchemaType">
    <xsd:annotation>
      <xsd:documentation>
        Type representing a conceptual schema. It must contain the namespace attribute,
        one or more label elements (for different languages), one or more location 
        elements (when the conceptual schema can be downloaded from multiple places) 
        and one concepts element with at least one concept. An optional alias can be 
        assigned to the schema.
      </xsd:documentation>
    </xsd:annotation>
    <xsd:sequence>
      <xsd:element name="label" type="langType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
      <xsd:element name="alias" type="xsd:string" minOccurs="0"/>
      <xsd:element name="location" type="xsd:anyURI" maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
      <xsd:element name="concepts">
        <xsd:complexType>
          <xsd:sequence>
            <xsd:element name="concept" type="conceptType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
          </xsd:sequence>
        </xsd:complexType>
      </xsd:element>
    </xsd:sequence>
    <xsd:attribute name="namespace" type="xsd:anyURI" use="required"/>
  </xsd:complexType>
  <xsd:complexType name="conceptType">
    <xsd:annotation>
      <xsd:documentation>
        Type representing a concept. It must contain the id attribute and the
        datatype element. An optional alias and documentation (doc) element can be 
        present. The documentation be a textual description or a link. The required 
        attribute can be used to indicate if this concept is mandatory or not.
        Although not enforced by this schema, the datatype must be a fully qualified 
        XML Schema primitive datatype.
      </xsd:documentation>
    </xsd:annotation>
    <xsd:sequence>
      <xsd:element name="alias" type="xsd:string" minOccurs="0"/>
      <xsd:element name="datatype" type="xsd:string"/>
      <xsd:element name="doc" type="langType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/>
    </xsd:sequence>
    <xsd:attribute name="id" type="xsd:string" use="required"/>
    <xsd:attribute name="required" type="xsd:boolean"/>
  </xsd:complexType>
  <xsd:complexType name="langType">
    <xsd:simpleContent>
      <xsd:extension base="xsd:string">
        <xsd:attribute ref="xml:lang" use="optional"/>
      </xsd:extension>
    </xsd:simpleContent>
  </xsd:complexType>
</xsd:schema>
```

The example below is an excerpt of an instance document describing
DarwinCore as a conceptual schema:

```
<cns xmlns="http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/cns/1.0">
  <schema namespace="http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/dwcore/">
  <label>DarwinCore v1.4</label>
  <alias>dwc_1_4</alias>
  <location>http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/tdwg_dw_core.xsd</location>
  <concepts>
    <concept id="http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/dwcore/GlobalUniqueIdentifier" required="true">
      <alias>GlobalUniqueIdentifier</alias>
      <datatype>http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#string</datatype>
      <doc>http://wiki.tdwg.org/twiki/bin/view/DarwinCore/GlobalUniqueIdentifier</doc>
    </concept>
    <concept id="http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/dwcore/DateLastModified" required="true">
      <alias>DateLastModified</alias>
      <datatype>http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#dateTime</datatype>
      <doc>http://wiki.tdwg.org/twiki/bin/view/DarwinCore/DateLastModified</doc>
    </concept>
  </schema>
</cns>
```

== Term Definitions ==

| Backus-Naur Form | A metasyntax used to express context-free grammars. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backus-Naur_form. |
| DarwinCore | Standard to facilitate the exchange of species occurrence data. See http://www.tdwg.org/activities/darwincore. |
| Dublin Core | Dublin Core Metadata Initiative. See http://dublincore.org. |
| GET | HTTP communication method where form data are encoded as parameters in an extension to a URL. The GET method is principally used to transmit requests for data to a web server (e.g., a simple database search). |
| HTML | Hypertext Markup Language. A subset of Standard Generalised Markup Language (SGML), used for authoring pages for the World Wide Web. |
| HTTP | Hypertext Transfer protocol, the commonly used protocol for transmitting requests and documents between applications on the World Wide Web. |
| KVP | Key-Value Pair. One of the possible encodings for TAPIR requests. |
| normative | Referring to a standard or set of norms that are understood to be correct. A normative document is one which describes how things ought to be and why. |
| POST | POST is an HTTP communication method that can include any kind of data or command. The data are encoded separately and do not form part of the URL as in a GET message so this method is better for complex, sensitive, lengthy or non-ascii data. |
| protocol | An agreed format for transmitting data between two or more applications. |
| Provider | In the context of TAPIR, an organization or person hosting one or more TAPIR services. |
| Provider software | Software running on a web server that facilitates access to data. |
| RDF | Resource Description Framework. See http://www.w3.org/RDF/. |
| RDF Schema | A language for describing vocabularies in RDF. See http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/. |
| TDWG | Taxonomic Databases Working Group. See http://www.tdwg.org/. |
| UDDI | Universal Description, Discovery and Integration. UDDI is a specification for maintaining standardised directories of information about web services. |
| URL | Uniform Resource Locator. The address of a resource on the Internet |
| URI | Uniform Resource Identifier. A formatted string that serves as an identifier for a resource, typically, but not exclusively, on the Internet. URIs are used in HTML hyperlinks. |
| W3C | World Wide Web consortium. See http://www.w3c.org. |
| Web Service | A service based on Internet Protocols, such as HTTP, SMTP or FTP. |
| wrapper | Provider software that allows standardised queries to be run against an underlying database. |
| WSDL | Web Services Description Language. An XML format for describing Web Services as a set of end points operating on messages containing either document-oriented or procedure-oriented information. WSDL is the language used by UDDI. See: http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl. |
| XMI | XML Metadata Interchange is an OMG ([Object Management Group http://www.omg.org/]) standard for exchanging metadata information via XML. See http://www.omg.org/technology/documents/formal/xmi.htm. |
| XML | Extensible Markup Language developed by the W3C. A means of tagging data for transmission, validation and manipulation. See http://www.w3.org/XML and http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml. |
| XML Schema | A formal definition of the required and optional structure and content of XML formatted documents within its domain. See http://www.w3.org/XML/Schema. |
| XPath | Defines a way of locating and processing items in XML documents by using an addressing syntax based on the path through the documents logical tree structure. See http://www3.org/TR/xpath. |


== History of Changes ==

The following changes were made to this document since its first public release.

Date: September, 8th, 2009

- Added paragraph about the target audience of this document.
- Added links to other TAPIR documents (executive summary and TAPIR networks guide).


Date: July, 21st, 2009

- Added recommendation to use default port numbers in access points.
- Added indentation when defining entity and VCARD sub-nodes.
- Specified XML encoding precedence.


Date: February, 5th, 2009

- Revised all text before submitting to the TDWG standards track.
- Removed references to DarwinCore and ABCD.
- Changed documentation about <address> and added <regionCode>, <countryCode> and <zipCode> as part of entity metadata.
- Removed xslt-apply parameter and xslt on server side capability.
- Added "type" attribute (organization or person) to related entities.
- Added new <rootElement> in the output model definition to indicate the name of a global element that should be the root element in search responses.
- Changed response specification forcing HTTP 204 when the envelope is turned off and a search returns no results. Services are now free to perform content negotiation when the envelope is turned off in the search operation.
- Removed parameters "partial" and "omit-ns".
- Included paragraph about the possibility to declare custom operations.
- Included content about new section "archives" in capabilities.
- Updated XML Schema location from http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/1.0/schema/tapir.xsd to http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/1.0/schema/tdwg_tapir.xsd.
- Made several adjustments for compatibility with the TDWG Standards Documentation Specification.


Date: September, 18th, 2008

- Changed section about message transport to indicate that TAPIR requires HTTP/1.0 or greater.
- Removed references to Concept Name Servers.
- Added appendix with a simple XML encoding to represent conceptual schemas.
- Minor changes in text to improve clarity.


Date: February, 7th, 2008

- Added recommendation for not omitting the charset in the HTTP header of responses.
- Changed section about response structures to be clearer about its meaning and to define there the "basic schema language".
- Added section with additional interpretation rules for filters.
- Added paragraph in the Capabilities Response/Concepts section to reinforce that providers should understand the short notation when a mapped concept and its schema are declared with an alias.
- Added new "datatype" attribute to <mappedConcept> elements in capabilities responses.
- Added statement in the Inventory Respose section saying that the order of <record> elements should be ascending according to the concept's datatype declared in the capabilities response.
- Added statement that conceptual schemas should minimally indicate the datatypes for each concept.


Date: July, 18th, 2007

- Replaced outputModel by externalOutputModel in search template example.
- Environment variable "lastUpdated" was renamed to "lastUpdate" to be consistent with the XML Schema.
- Included environment variables: dateCreated, metadataLanguage, dataSourceLanguage, dataSourceDescription, rights, subject, bibliographicCitation, technicalContactName, technicalContactEmail, contentContactName, contentContactEmail.
- Included optional attribute "alias" in output models and templates declared in capabilities responses. Aliases can be used in KVP requests replacing the document location.
- Restricted the HTTP Content-Type header in POST/GET requests to be "application/x-www-form-urlencoded".
- Fixed wrong reference to attribute @frequency that was starting with a capital letter.
- Fixed typo in "globalParameters" element name.
- "template" elements in capabilities response examples were not inside a "templates" grouping element.
- "anyOutputModels" element in capabilities response example was lacking a "responseStructure" subelement.
- Fixed many capabilities response examples where the tag slash in supported operations was in the wrong position (e.g. </ping> instead of <ping/>).
- Mentioned the possibility of having multiple dc:language elements in metadata responses.
- Content of dc:language must follow RFC4646 and use the codes specified by the IANA Language Subtag Registry.
- Included custom slot as part of hasContact in metadata responses.


Date: February, 24th, 2007

- Correction: "envelope" parameter on search operations should be turned on by default.
- Included note about the possibility of restricting the allowable domains related to the location of stylesheets that are specified through the "xslt" parameter. When the stylesheet comes from an unknown location it can be ignored with a corresponding warning being raised in the diagnostics section.
- Added specific XML Schema capability for xsd:include.
- Included note about the fact that a provider is not forced to guarantee the entire validity of search responses according to the XML Schema defined in the response structure, except to the extent of its own declared XML Schema capabilities.
- Included recommendation for providers to raise warnings instead of errors when an unsupported XML Schema construct is found in the response structure.
- Included new search parameter called "omit-ns" instructing providers to omit or not namespace delarations and the corresponding prefixes in search responses when the envelope is turned off.
- Included a new attribute "required" for both concepts and variables in the output model mapping (defaults to false). When required, providers should raise an error when the concept is unmapped, or the variable is not available or the corresponding value is null.
- Node paths in output model mapping were not considering namespaces. When the response structure needs to make use of different namespaces, all namespaces need to be declared in the output model element and the nodes referenced in the xpaths must include the associated namespace prefix.
- Removed requirement that providers must automatically turn on envelopes in search responses when an error occurs.


Date: February, 7th, 2007

- Attribute nodes in output model mapping should include a slash before the attribute prefix "@" to be consistent with XPath and with the original integration document. Changed all mapping examples from node@attr to node/@attr.


Date: January, 22nd, 2007

- Updated XML Schema location from http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/1.0/tapir.xsd to http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/1.0/schema/tapir.xsd.
- Changed the definition of "model" parameter in the "KVP Requests" section. The previous definition "a pointer to a formatted (usually in XML schema) response structure" was wrong and was changed to "a pointer to an output model document".
- Changed the definition of "basicSchemaLanguage" by removing "simpleContent" and "complexContent" from the list of XML Schema constructs that need to be supported. Also replaced attribute "minOccurs" by attribute "use".
- Included explanation and example about the new optional attribute "tagName" for inventory concepts. Included the corresponding KVP parameter "tagname" or "n".
- Included optional "alias" attribute for mapped schemas in capabilities responses.
- Changed default value of "start" parameter to "0" (index of the first record).
- Included additional specification for the "like" operator saying that "not specifying any wildcard in the corresponding literal is equivalent to specifying two wildcards: one in the beginning and the other in the end of the literal value".
- Included additional specification for the "like" operator saying that when the character "*" is not meant to be a wildcard, it should be escaped by including "_" before the "*" character.
- Changed XML representation of variables to <variable name="var_name"/> and removed <custom> section in capabilities responses that could be used to advertise custom variables (not needed anymore because now xsd:any is used there).
- Changed explanation about source@accesspoint. In requests it must contain the IP address of each source, except the last one. In responses it must contain the service URL. Removed all accesspoint attributes from requests examples.
- Included KVP parameter "source-ip".
- Included new KVP parameter "descend" or "d" for search operations.
- Included additional explanation that maxElementRepetitions apply only to inventory and search responses.
- Included additional explanation that maxElementLevels apply only to search responses and do not consider the TAPIR envelope.
- Included new section about "response structures".

