TAPIR - TDWG Access Protocol for Information Retrieval

Protocol Specification - Version 1.0
%! target        : xhtml
%! style         : w3c_main.css
%! style         : w3c_examples.css
%! style         : tdwg_bar.css
%! Options       : --css-sugar
%! Encoding      : UTF-8
%! preproc       : URL_TAPIR_NS   http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/1.0
%! preproc       : URL_TAPIR_XSD  http://rs.tdwg.org/tapir/1.0/schema/tdwg_tapir.xsd
%! PostProc(html): '\(c\)' '&copy;'
%! PostProc(xhtml): '\(c\)' '&copy;'

Copyright (c) TDWG (2010). All Rights Reserved.

**This version:** tdwg_tapir_specification_%%mtime(%Y-%m-%d).htm

**Latest version:** www.tdwg.org/activities/tapir/specification

**Previous working draft:** www.tdwg.org/dav/subgroups/tapir/1.0/docs/tdwg_tapir_specification_2009-09-08.htm

**Date:** %%mtime(%d %B %Y)

**Technical writers of this document** 

- Renato De Giovanni ([CRIA www.cria.org.br]) <renato@cria.org.br>.
- Charles Copp ([EIM http://eim.metapath.org]) <eim@globalnet.co.uk>.


**Main contributors to the creation of the TAPIR protocol**

- Renato De Giovanni ([CRIA www.cria.org.br]) <renato@cria.org.br>.
- Markus Döring ([BGBM www.botanischer-garten-berlin.de]) <m.doering@bgbm.org>.
- Anton Güntsch ([BGBM www.botanischer-garten-berlin.de]) <a.guentsch@bgbm.org>.
- Dave Vieglais ([KU NHM & BRC www.nhm.ku.edu]) <vieglais@ku.edu>.
- Donald Hobern ([GBIF www.gbif.org]) <d.hobern@gbif.org>.
- Javier de la Torre ([BGBM www.botanischer-garten-berlin.de]) <jatorre@gmail.com>.
- John Wieczorek ([MVZ, Berkeley http://mvz.berkeley.edu]) <tuco@berkeley.edu>.
- Robert Gales ([KU NHM & BRC www.nhm.ku.edu]) <rgales@ku.edu>.
- Roger Hyam ([TDWG www.tdwg.org]) <roger@tdwg.org>.
- Stanley Blum ([California Academy of Sciences www.calacademy.org]) <sblum@calacademy.org>.
- Steven Perry ([KU NHM & BRC www.nhm.ku.edu]) <smperry@ku.edu>.


**Abstract**

This document specifies the TAPIR protocol and the structure and
syntax of TAPIR messages. This work is a product of the TDWG TAPIR 
task group, details of which can be found at www.tdwg.org/activities/tapir.

**Target audience**

This document contains technical details about the TAPIR
protocol. Previous knowledge about HTTP, XML and XML Schema is
assumed. This document was written for developers that need to build
TAPIR compliant software, network administrators that need to prepare
TAPIR documents, and users that want to directly interact with TAPIR
services.

There are other documents about TAPIR available. For a general
overview there is an
[Executive Summary http://www.tdwg.org/activities/tapir/executive-summary/].
More specific information about how to build TAPIR networks can be found in the 
[TAPIR Networks Guide http://www.tdwg.org/activities/tapir/network-builders-guide/].

**Status of this document**

Final version approved as a TDWG standard.

The English language version of this document is the only normative
version available.

Comments about this document can be sent to the TDWG Architecture
Group mailing list: tdwg-tag@lists.tdwg.org. Subscription and archives
are open to the public.

**Copyright notice**

This document follows the 
[Creative Commons License Deed: Attribution 3.0 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/deed]

You are free:
- to Share: to copy, distribute, display, and perform the work.
- to Remix: to make derivative works under the following condition:
 - Attribution: You must attribute the work to TDWG by citing the
standard by name and by providing the URL to the original document,
but not in any way that suggests that TDWG endorses you or your use of
the work.


For any reuse or distribution, you must make clear to others the
license terms of this work. The best way to do this is with a link to
this web page. Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get
permission from TDWG. Apart from the remix rights granted under this
license, nothing in this license impairs or restricts the author's
moral rights. Your fair use and other rights are in no way affected by
the above. This is a human-readable summary of the 
[Legal Code http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode] 
(the full license).

**Disclaimer**

This document and the information contained herein are
provided on an "as is" basis. TDWG makes no warranties regarding the
information provided, and disclaims liability for damages resulting
from its use.

**Table of Contents**


%!Include: ''body.htm''
